Although we don't fully understand how you feel, the LORD knows exactly how sad your heart is and will always be there to support you.
2 The LORD showed love to mankind before he created Adam and Eve.
Jehovah's Witnesses, march on!
"We want you to know that we love you very much.
About 2,000 years ago, Jesus said, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few.
For several years, they pondered whether to move to a foreign country where there was a need for evangelists, but Perrine could not make up his mind.
Even though I often beat people, it doesn't make me any happier.
Not flinching in fear.
There are still some challenges, but by and large, they have been blessed by serving in areas where more preachers are needed.
8 The supreme dominion of the LORD is important, but that does not mean that we are worthless in God's eyes or that he does not value the arrangements for our salvation.
People in Jesus' lineage records were not always the firstborn.
But we're not afraid.
14 What should true Christians do to be seen as different from the followers of false religions?
As we learned in our last lesson, the Bible does not say that a person has to be a certain age to be baptized.
Brothers and sisters from different backgrounds serve the LORD in unity.
15,16. (a) Does a person need to be of a certain age to be baptized? Please explain. (
We got up before dawn (as we did in Joplin, Missouri) and quietly slipped flyers or pamphlets under the doors of the tenants.
b) According to Romans 12:2, why should we not assimilate the ideas of the world?
What can we do to avoid being influenced by wrong desires?
So, we both started on November 1, 1947 as pioneers.
Jesus was indeed recognized, but things may not have turned out the way Mary expected.
Because of the recession, everyone's life is simple.
17 Each person who has lost a friend or family member takes a different amount of time to get over the pain.
But the price we pay is nothing compared to the blessings we receive.
In any case, as long as our good friends do not take Jehovah's standards seriously, they may jeopardize our precious relationship with God.
Actually, no, Job doesn't think so either.
The LORD has supported me with the "right hand of righteousness" as He promised, and has been with me and strengthened me. (
13,14.(a) Why is it said that politics and religion lead to violence and injustice? (
How do we not fall into the trap?
Nevertheless, he believed that the God of life would remember him and would be able to resurrect him in the future.
Children are not born knowing what is right and what is wrong; they need to be trained (see para. 8).
Also, a brother living in the Philippines said, "Being a spiritual person gives me inner peace and helps me get along better with brothers from different backgrounds."
Soon, I was also discussing the Bible with my brother's daughter and son-in-law.
The second text will remind us how to avoid wrong attitudes so as not to lose the reward promised by the LORD.
8 When Jesus spoke of his Father, he said, "Every branch of mine that does not bear fruit, he removes."
"I work with a brother, but I don't get along with him.
What can we do so that we don't forget to give our possessions to the LORD?
What do people say about Paradise?
The world in general has no respect for God.
17 Sergio said: "There was a time when we did not go to the square to preach because we were sick.
In May 1915, Lusitania was torpedoed and sunk off the coast of southern Ireland.
See the accompanying column "Why don't you come and see for yourself!" .
The laws and principles of Scripture are "profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness". (
Why is it sometimes discouraging to preach in areas where the response is lukewarm?
The lower the copper content of the contraceptive the less effective it is."
However, not everyone responds favorably to the message of the Kingdom when they hear it. (
Thus, in July 1953, I participated in the local congress of the "New World Society".
4.( a) How did Paul feel about the lukewarm response of many Jews to the truth? (
Immortality appears to be an unexpected blessing, since it is not mentioned in the Hebrew Scrolls.
Young men must stand firm against the devil
Keep picking, keep looking."
The key to the Roman soldier's invincibility on the battlefield was daily practice with the sword.
2 The LORD did not tell us what the name of this rebellious angel was.
When Danielle was unable to continue working full time, she turned to other ways of supporting me and taking care of me, so that I had no worries and was able to serve for 37 years as the coordinator of the Divisional Committee.
11 When we cultivate the traits of love and kindness, we will not easily envy others.
The exhortation of Proverbs 18:13 is apt, as the verse says, "To answer before you hear is folly and shame."
What biblical accounts prove that the LORD can help people in surprising ways?
God's faithful servant, who has defied the odds.
We must be firm in the end.
A joyful heart does not languish.
Let us sing aloud!
April 3, 2017,The Museum of the Bible at World Headquarters in Warwick, New York, USA is open for tours.
(See the picture at the beginning of the text.) (b) Why are the horses different colors?
John really doesn't go there anymore.
We didn't realize then that in a few years we'd be living in Burkina Faso for a while.
(1John 3:10,11) Though they came from different countries, races, languages and cultural backgrounds, they all imitated Jesus and loved one another.
Or is he just a different personality than me?"
Some Bible translations include verses from John 7:53-8:11, however, many people do not realize that these verses were added later and were not part of the original work.
How do we avoid abusing our God-given freedom?
Jesus doesn't directly state what the fruit refers to in the parable, but there are clues that Jesus talks about that can help us find the answer.
12 If we hate iniquity as much as Jehovah does, then we will be able to see that certain behaviors are wrong even if the Bible does not explicitly say so.
14 Sister Raylene in the Philippines has a different challenge.
17 We learn from this text three ways to promote Christian unity: (1) we trust God's kingdom to correct all injustices; (2) we will not support either side on political issues; and (3) we will not use violence to solve problems.
It was written for readers who are less familiar with the Bible or do not recognize it at all.
For the LORD's people, it can be upsetting to have an unconverted loved one oppose our faith.
Jehovah's Witnesses, move forward!
9 Perhaps you are not used to singing because of your family background, culture and environment.
Sometimes, he helps us in ways we don't expect.
Moving forward, all over the world.
Despite my family background, I did not become a Nazi party member or a nun.
The presentation did not go well.
(Matthew 26:52,53) What an important reminder of Jesus' words, a reminder that is also consistent with Jesus' earlier prayer that disciples must not be of the world. (
If we worship the Lord, we must want to be loved by him, don't we?
As time passed and work expanded, Bertram's facility wasn't big enough.
How can young people stay focused on their goals and not get distracted?
13 James and John, however, had not yet learned to treat people justly.
The angel continued, "Do not be afraid, Mary, you have found favor with God."
In the end, Habakkuk's expectations were not disappointed.
Page 3 Let us sing aloud!
16. On what grounds should we not be generous?
She had been having sex with different people since she was 15 years old in an attempt to combat her loneliness.
15 Jesus said of preaching and making disciples, "The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few.
In December of the same year, a group of Jehovah's Witnesses came from the town of Angat to preach in our village.
What can we do so that we don't fall away from the truth or "drift away with the current"?
With the help of the LORD, even imperfect people can overcome Satan. (
Why is there so little mention of Satan in the Biblical record before the coming of the Messiah?
In terms of worship activities, there have been developments that were not envisioned by the brothers and sisters who began their ministry in the 1950s.
What changed Peter to put aside his deep-seated prejudices and enter Cornelius' house?
Therefore, the revised translation of Psalm 144 does not change our understanding of biblical truth.
Today, if the people we preach to are not responding well to the Good News, we need to try to understand why they are responding that way.
We didn't have much money. How did we manage?
Page 23 Young people are to "labor continually to finish the work of your salvation."
Arise and be baptized! --Acts 22:16
However, the fun soon came to an end.
There are those who do not stand up for the LORD. Let us not be influenced by them.
Soon, this African country would no longer be an obstacle to our construction work.
15 Moses was influenced by the behavior of others and as a result did not continue to look to the LORD.
For faith is as firm as a ship's anchor.
Page 27 Young people must stand firm against the devil
Will I help my child to see things from the LORD's point of view and not be influenced by the world's view?"
18 What helps the couple cope with such a worrying situation?
At one time or another, we face things in our lives that cause us worry, disappointment, and pain.
Although we were Catholic, Grandpa was very open-minded about religion, so he took some religious books and magazines from a friend.
11 You can be sure that by worshipping the LORD you will have many good friends from all over the world, some of whom you have never even met!
Unlike David, Roboam didn't cultivate a close relationship with God.
True Christians will "speak the truth to one another" in all matters of life.
And I began to think that maybe I don't see myself the way God sees me.
That brother didn't realize that a little greeting could be so effective.
B) Why can't injustice be solved by violent means? (
Moses' words show that he has no respect for the LORD, for he does not attribute the power to perform miracles to the LORD.
4 If you are discouraged from preaching in unresponsive areas, consider the experience of the Apostle Paul.
I never imagined that the truth about the LORD God and His will would be so transformative in my life.
Harmful gossip can blow things out of proportion and get things out of hand.
But, Osborne says, "The job search didn't go as smoothly as we had hoped."
However, after the resurrection of Jesus, baptism by immersion took on a different meaning for those who wanted to become Christians.
They were determined not to worship the golden image set up by King Nebuchadnezzar, and it is clear from what they said to the king that they had meditated on how to show their loyalty to the Lord. (
You may not be accustomed to the way brothers and sisters in the new congregation speak, for example, they may be more tactful or direct than those in the previous congregation.
If you have children, ask God to give you the Holy Spirit to help you discipline your children in love rather than in anger.
I work in a bank and I have a lot of contact with lawyers, but a lot of them don't like their jobs," she says.
On this point, scholars have different views.
Don't let Satan use fear to discourage us from being faithful to God.
The Lord did not forsake Joseph, and he will not forsake you (see paragraph 13).
Shortly after the General Assembly, they took action to achieve their objectives step by step.
How did the LORD recognize Jesus in a way he didn't expect?
For Didier and Nadine, learning Malagasy was not easy.
I don't know what I did wrong." --Janet
Why do some Jehovah's Witnesses make it so hard to see that they are serving God?
Apparently they describe the time of day in different ways. The
Making friends with unrighteous money. --Luke 16:9
Continue to preach boldly to people.
We will not be "assimilated into the system" if we see in what ways the mind of God differs from the mind of the world.
Moving Forward with Good News for the Kingdom
Sometimes, others may judge us unfairly or even criticize us.
Fame, power and wealth are fleeting and not that important," she said.
Even when a storm comes, there's no fear.
On one occasion, 70 disciples returned to Jesus after their ministry and were overjoyed that they had been able to perform miracles and expel evil spirits.
Young people are to "labor continually to finish the work of your salvation."
Therefore, we should not let imperfections stop us from singing and praising the LORD.
John the Baptist sent his disciples to ask Jesus, "Are you 'the one who is to come'?
Thus, the picture we have drawn of Paul's appearance corresponds to the ancient documentary records.
Frankly speaking, no one today can be sure of Paul's appearance.
Therefore, you need to think about how you intend to use your life.
Today, brothers and sisters who have moved to Burma to preach are appealing, "Please come to Burma and help us!"
Therefore, the revised translation of Psalm 144 does not change our understanding of biblical truth.
Jesus said, "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws people." (
What do you mean, "love without hypocrisy"?
About 2,000 years ago, Jesus said, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few.
Page 18 The word of God shall endure for all time.
Actually, no, Job doesn't think so either.
8 When Jesus spoke of his Father, he said, "Every branch of mine that does not bear fruit, he removes."
Truth "does not bring peace, it brings the sword."
The word of God shall endure for all time.
17 Young people, think about this: if your parents never correct you, do you think they really care about you? (
What biblical accounts prove that the LORD can help people in surprising ways?
Or is he just a different personality than me?"
15 Jesus said of preaching and making disciples, "The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few.
Truth "does not bring peace, but the sword."
So why did Jesus say to his disciples, "But don't do this"?
I never imagined that the truth about the LORD God and His will would be so transformative in my life.
See the accompanying column, "Love is not reckless disregard for rules," on page 27 of the January 2016 issue of The Watchtower.
The Titanic sank in less than two years.
When Jesus heard this, he said, 'Healthy people don't need a doctor, but sick people do. '
Making friends with unrighteous money. --Luke 16:9
The brother explained to the ambassador in a respectful manner and dispelled the ambassador's misunderstanding and prejudice against us.
Here's what some of them had to say.
Jesus did not say whether the steward actually did what he was accused of.
However, rather than focusing on the reasons for the steward's dismissal, Jesus' parable focuses on the actions taken by the steward.
We didn't have much money. How did we manage?
Korah, Dathan and Abiram were jealous of Moses and rebelled against him.
The elders did this to ensure that the congregation of Israel would remain clean and to help those who had been killed by mistake to receive the mercy of the Lord.
Who was Joseph of Arimathea?
I quickly asked another brother to answer again,well ...... I hope his answer is correct."
For these grateful Jehovah's Witnesses, the joy of being together with their brothers and sisters must have made all the sacrifices worthwhile.
12 Would it be too harsh for the LORD to counsel Job directly after he had endured a severe trial?
Despite this, Joseph did not compromise and acted courageously. (
Solomon acted with great courage, and with the help of the Lord, he built the magnificent temple in seven and a half years.
4 In the first century, there were those who accepted the truth of Jesus' preaching and then ceased to walk in accordance with it.
Young people must make decisions about education, careers and other aspects.
The pictures depicting Paul in our publications are not based on confirmed archaeological data.
13. (a) Under what circumstances do we need to show more patience? (
Preparing a radio program at the WBBR radio studio
About 2,000 years ago, Jesus said, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few.
Some of these preachers had grandparents who had listened to Brother Luke's speech in 1925.
8 The supreme dominion of the LORD is important, but that does not mean that we are worthless in God's eyes or that he does not value the arrangements for our salvation.
9 There were also older and infirm brothers and sisters in the Bertram family.
My parents immigrated to Canada from Ukraine and settled in Roseburn, Manitoba.
In some jurisdictions, underage people who send pornographic text messages can be prosecuted as sex offenders.
11 The Bible describes individuals who, because of a lack of self-control, have engaged in sexually deviant behavior.
During family worship, talk to your family about the benefits you have gained from the change in meeting or preaching, and you may find that this encourages you as well as your family.
As we will see in the next lesson, these three men were able to remain faithful because they truly knew the LORD.
In Winnipeg, I met my brother Jack, who had traveled from northern Ontario to attend the convention.
B) Under what circumstances do we also need to restrain ourselves?
What does Habakkuk 2:3 assure us of?
During the first year of the dictatorship, some 450 people subscribed to the Portuguese-language Watchtower.
In the days of Jesus, many Jews were prejudiced against people.
What important thing did Jesus talk to His disciples about the night before He sacrificed His life?
3 Paul writes that the "last days" will be an "extraordinary and difficult time".
In the first text, we will talk about what it means to be a spiritual person and what we can learn from spiritual people.
See what the Bible says: Daniel 2:44; Proverbs 2:21,22.
During this difficult period, a number of conferences were organized in order to strengthen the confidence of the whole community of brethren. The
How can the principles of Scripture help me decide if I want to play online with strangers?"
During my first few years in Bertram, I had the opportunity to participate in radio broadcasts on WBBR.
We will discuss some examples of how we can be honest in every way.
Back at Bertram's, the docent asked us, "What's the difference between a meteor and a meteorite?"
11 The LORD accomplishes many things in the last days, and each of us can support these works.
What trials did Daniel and his three friends face in Babylon? (
In 1988, I served as an interpreter for Brother Theodore Geras at the "God's Fairness" regional convention in Paris.
19 In England, a couple received help from two elders.
The 1944 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (in English) says: "This congress made Jehovah's Witnesses a household name in Mexico."
These 550 evangelists who came to participate in the special event distributed about 60,000 copies of the publication in two weeks!
and students at the Killette School
In Jesus' time, people were not united by political, social, and racial differences.
Why is it sometimes discouraging to preach in areas where the response is lukewarm?
In what ways can you show compassion to people?
17 Job's life was dramatically transformed in a short period of time.
Immortality appears to be an unexpected blessing, since it is not mentioned in the Hebrew Scrolls.
In these extraordinary times, which are difficult to cope with, it is easy to become overwhelmed by the pressures and problems of life.
How can you apply this principle to choosing a spouse?
The name Satan appears only 18 times in the Hebrew Scriptures, but more than 30 times in the Greek Scriptures.
He said that in the last days, children would disobey their parents.
Romans 15:5 also speaks of having "the attitude of mind of Christ Jesus."
In what does the LORD show self-control?
Each of the nine articles in this series will explore one of the qualities of the Fruit of the Spirit, love, which was discussed in the first article.
b) How does Ezekiel 3:18,19 and 18:23 help us to persevere in preaching to men?
Special Herald with companion (right) in Mistelbach, Austria
In these short verses of John 15:4-10, Jesus uses the word "hour" several times to emphasize the need for patience.
Practice singing psalms during family worship time (see paragraph 18)
15. How do the verses in Psalm 37:25 and Hebrews 13:5 help parents show courage?
One sister, Katharina, set a goal at the age of 17 to preach to every one of her coworkers.
But the joy of being with my daughter soon came to an end when I was arrested in 1959 for printing Bible books.
8 Elisha came to the dead boy in the woman's house and prayed to God.
In prison, one of the officers, while interrogating me, shouted at me: "We will soon destroy you as easily as we trample on a rat!"
Later, Livia and I were married on October 27, 1973, and had the honor of having Brother Noel give the wedding speech.
What can we mention in our prayers?
It is noteworthy that singing played an important part in the worship of the ancient Israelites as they faithfully served the Lord.
15 2 Timothy 3:4 says that these pleasure-loving people completely ignore God.
14 Sister Raylene in the Philippines has a different challenge.
As a result, in a short period of time, our division has more than tripled its land area.
17 We learn from this text three ways to promote Christian unity: (1) we trust God's kingdom to correct all injustices; (2) we will not support either side on political issues; and (3) we will not use violence to solve problems.
Later, wanting to do more for Jehovah, she applied to serve at Bertram and was invited to work at Bertram in 1971.
The second text will talk about how the LORD sets an example of forgiveness, respect for life, and justice.
In addition, the Greek Scrolls mention the name of Abraham more than 70 times.
How did the Lord consider the needs of the Israelites while they were at the Red Sea? (See paragraph 13.)
9 Jesus makes it clear that we should treat each other as brothers and sisters, and then he emphasizes the importance of humility. (
There are certainly some challenges for brothers and sisters preaching in areas with a very high ratio of preachers.
Today, there are more than 50,000 preachers of the Good News of the Kingdom of God in Portugal and some Portuguese-speaking islands, including the Azores and Madeira.
Although life in Pine Bluff has been difficult, we have had a wonderful time with our brothers and sisters and have enjoyed preaching in the area.
Started serving in Bertram's, Brooklyn, at age 17.
Have there been any significant advances in the medical and scientific communities in this area since the 1979 article in The Watchtower was published?
16 During the millennial reign, Jesus and the 144,000 assistant kings will help restore perfection to the faithful.
They were reminded of the Pioneer Training Course, which had been started in 1977 to encourage trainees to move to serve in areas where there was a need for more preachers.
When involved in evangelism
I met George Singer in Quetta, a special pioneer of about 25 years of age.
Living there is very helpful for evangelism because we can hold meetings in both Paraguay and Brazil.
In the second text, we will talk about how to progress spiritually and live as a spiritual person.
I'm glad I had the honor to do my part in this.
Sowing the Seeds of the Kingdom in Portugal
What can we learn from the parable of the loving Samaritan?
(John 10:16) YHWH also teaches us in the Bible what kind of people we should be.
In the Soviet Union, Jehovah's Witnesses were politically neutral. (
Also, we can help them to see that it is good for people to live by God's standards. (
2 This text will discuss examples of biblical figures who claimed to be for Yahweh, but at the same time did things that God hated.
Conducted Bible classes in Burkina Faso
For the faithful Jew, life in pagan Babylon was a major test.
Rodney and his wife Jean, who live in Australia (AUS) and are in their 50s, have two children, Jordan and Danica, and their entire family moved to Myanmar in 2010 to support evangelistic activities.
What will this text talk about? (
Why is it helpful for parents to think about the commands in Matthew 28:19,20 to teach their children?
The Golden Age (English) says: "There is no doubt that this congress is very important and represents a turning point in the history of evangelization in Mexico."
In the 1990s, we used to meet immigrants from Brazil when we preached," says her daughter, Sakiko.
The studio is located on the second floor of 124 Columbia Hill Road.
17 Jesus said while on earth that he wanted to be glorified with the Father in the way he had been glorified. (
I love Bertram's service because everything I do here is to help others draw near to the LORD."
3 In this text, we will look at how God's Word has been preserved in the face of (1) the evolution of language; (2) the impact of political situations on the common language; and (3) the obstruction of Bible translation.
In today's system, why are there always poor people?
4 We can see a number of examples of the LORD's compassion in the Bible.
Have we listened to the latest instructions given to us by the LORD?
When teaching in the congregation
8. (a) Why does the fruit not refer to new disciples in the parable of the vine? (
More or less, we face things in our lives that cause us worry, disappointment, and pain.
Life here is simpler and gives me more time to work for the LORD.
It is the LORD's desire that people of "every nation, tribe, and language" should have the opportunity to understand the Bible and benefit from it. (
True Christians will "speak the truth to one another" in all matters of life.
3 In Jesus' day, some of the religious leaders had the wrong idea about being recognized.
The last days of our lives are by no means carefree.
Let's also consider that Jesus was only in his early 30's when he completed his earthly mission.
As a result, upon our arrival in Jordan, we were delighted to see a group of people standing on the top floor of the terminal with a banner that read "Welcome Jehovah's Witnesses".
14 In the last days, people will also exhibit other undesirable characteristics, and Christians need to avoid such people.
In Australia, for example, a pioneer sister named Tiffany began studying Swahili in order to assist the Swahili congregation in Brisbane.
4,5. (a) What situation did the steward face in Jesus' parable? (
4 If you are discouraged from preaching in unresponsive areas, consider the experience of the Apostle Paul.
I worked at 124 Columbia Hill Road for decades.
How do we use the Teaching Toolkit to teach people the truth when we preach?
See the accompanying column, "Love is not reckless disregard for rules," on page 27 of the January 2016 issue of The Watchtower.
By the time of Jesus, the Jews had adopted the Greek and Roman method of dividing time, dividing the night into four shifts.
In Matthew 10:11-13, Jesus said, "When you enter a house, greet the people in it.
8 In 33 A.D., the resurrected Jesus appeared to more than 500 people, including men and women, and possibly even some children.
Since the International Congress was held in 1961, in 1960 I was responsible for arranging charter flights from the United States to Europe, in addition to my original duties.
A) Why is it important to learn self-discipline in the process of "putting on a new character"? (
Noah's father, Lamech, was a God-fearing man who died about five years before the Flood.
However, there are many things in life that can rob us of our joy, so how can we continue to be joyful?
What role did singing play in the worship of the ancient Israelites?
B) What does the Bible teach children to do?
For the life story of Lucia Mussanet, see Wake Up! (
in everyday life
Look at what the Bible says: Romans 5:12; 2 Peter 3:9
In addition, YHWH speaks of the Messianic Kingdom in Scripture, and of the hope of anointed Christians for eternal life in heaven, and the hope of the "other sheep" for eternal life in an earthly paradise. (
First mission in 1970, Venezuela.
I graduated from high school in 1951 and needed to make a decision about my future.
8 Paul also speaks of how people will treat one another in the last days.
What do you mean, "love without hypocrisy"?
Peace is something that everyone desperately needs.
The first text will explain what it means to shed old character and why doing so is imperative.
However, it is helpful for parents to think about what it means to make disciples.
To find the answer to this question, we need to understand what true joy is and why some people remain joyful in the face of trials.
Which love is the highest form of love?
I cried when I heard that, and I apologized to her.
(Deuteronomy 21:22,23) The Romans, however, usually disposed of the bodies of criminals as they pleased, either leaving them hanging on poles or dumping them in mass graves.
I am responsible for obtaining visas and arranging transportation for the graduates so that these dedicated brothers and sisters can get to their area of assignment.
I myself took a flight to Germany and attended the congress in Hamburg.
For several years, they pondered whether to move to a foreign country where there was a need for evangelists, but Perrine could not make up his mind.
When we came back to the square again, some people passing by asked us: 'Are you okay?
My parents immigrated to Canada from Ukraine and settled in Roseburn, Manitoba.
After leaving Haiti, I was sent to the Central African Republic as a missionary.
Since I could type, I was assigned to the magazine department about a month later.
After Arthur went to Gillette School, I was sent back to Hemsworth as a special herald.
3 When the apostle Peter was asked to go to the home of a non-Jew, Cornelius, in Caesarea, some thoughts probably flashed through Peter's mind. (
Did they return to Jerusalem just to live in comfort?
But 13 years after Joseph was sold into Egypt, things suddenly took a turn for the worse.
Brothers and sisters who came from abroad to participate in the program enjoyed their time preaching in Turkey.
When I was a child, I was chosen with three girls to lay flowers for Adolf Hitler after his speeches.
17 Sergio said: "There was a time when we did not go to the square to preach because we were sick.
But what do brothers and sisters do before moving to Burma?
To learn more, read "Youth Ask: Transmitting Sexting - What Should I Know?" on jw.org. (
In 1956, I was sent to Haiti.
In 2007, at the age of 79, I traveled to Africa again!
Many brothers and sisters serve in areas where more preachers are needed.
Brother Hughes said, "We need some couples to get involved in special evangelistic campaigns, driving around the country distributing tracts."
After the Congress, I was sent back to the Philippines to serve.
Brother Ferguson's arrival was well timed, as Brother Younger had since received a commission to serve in new areas, including those in the Soviet Union.
A few of us walked eight kilometers to Brother Cruz's home for the meeting.
b) What do we see in the way the LORD treated Lot's family?
However, after preaching with white brothers and sisters and visiting their homes, Numa exclaimed, "They are ordinary people like us!"
Some time later, we were commissioned to go to South London.
John really doesn't go there anymore.
If the manslaughterer had not fled to one of the cities of refuge established by the Lord, the closest relatives of the deceased would have been authorized to put the manslaughterer to death.
8 Elisha came to the dead boy in the woman's house and prayed to God.
In addition, some 550 Turkish-speaking brothers and sisters have come to Turkey from other countries to preach the Good News with local evangelists.
My family and I usually go to Texas for the convention.
In addition to attending the General Assembly, these delegates had the opportunity to participate in special trips to Lebanon and Jordan to personally visit places mentioned in the Bible.
Later, wanting to do more for Jehovah, she applied for service in Bertram and was invited to work there in 1971.
I think every family can consider serving somewhere like Myanmar."
Later, after consulting a doctor, Thierry and Nadia asked their mother if she wanted to move from France to Madagascar to live with them.
Apostates and opponents will post our published material on their web pages, thereby attracting Jehovah's Witnesses and others to view it.
They were reminded of the Pioneer Training Course, which had been started in 1977 to encourage trainees to move to serve in areas where there was a need for more preachers.
Why did Riana choose to move there?
What difficulties did the Jews returning to Jerusalem face?
Even though my health is deteriorating, I still go there two or three times a week."
In December of the same year, a group of Jehovah's Witnesses came from the town of Angat to preach in our village.
Today, brothers and sisters who have moved to Burma to preach are appealing, "Please come to Burma and help us!"
How do we know that Jesus and the criminals beside him didn't go to Paradise on the day they were executed?
What changed Peter to put aside his deep-seated prejudices and enter Cornelius' house?
Brothers and sisters who have moved from abroad to serve in Turkey meet people every day who have never heard of the LORD at all.
Mark 15:43 says, "He took courage and went in to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus."
Rodney and his wife Jean, who live in Australia (AUS) and are in their 50s, have two children, Jordan and Danica, and their entire family moved to Myanmar in 2010 to support evangelistic activities.
They had to spend days riding mules or walking to the nearest railroad station and then take a train from there to get to the city where the convention was to be held.
Our friend has fallen asleep, and now I am going to wake him up. --John 11:11
A few months later, we were sent to Gilbert Plains, about 240 kilometers north of Souris.
Type donate.jw.org into your browser
Paul and Barnabas immediately made it clear that they did not agree with the crowd by tearing off their coats and jumping into the crowd, shouting, "Why are you doing this?
However, there are still vast areas that have not been visited by preachers.
A few months later, she moved to Massachusetts (MA) to serve, where more preachers were needed.
Around this time, Virgilio Ferguson, a Brazilian biblical researcher, planned to move to Portugal to assist in evangelistic work.
"We'd like to go!"
So, would Federico encourage other brothers and sisters to preach in areas of greater need?
I hope that the above voices of brothers and sisters will make you think about whether you can serve in areas where there is no one to preach and help the sincere people there to know God.
Ezekiel was taken captive to Babylon in 617 BC.
On September 19 of that same year, I was invited to work at Bertram's in Brooklyn when I was 17 years old.
Why should immigrant parents consider language-related matters when helping their children spiritually?
On one occasion, I went with Brother Finch to preach in North Pakistan.
Because of the arrangement of the city of refuge, these people will not be forced to flee to foreign lands where they will be tempted to worship false gods.
Learning French was not easy for most of the new missionaries, but the locals were willing to listen to the Good News.
For example, after Jesus performed a miracle and fed a large crowd, these people followed Jesus to the other side of the Sea of Galilee.
According to Jewish literature, the family of the manslaughterer was also able to flee with him to the city of refuge.
As Didier, mentioned earlier, said, "Preaching where the need is great trains us to be ready for the future."
The Lord, the "Master of the Harvest," has inspired many brothers and sisters to move to Myanmar to assist in the spiritual harvest in this Southeast Asian country.
After that, we moved from Estonia to Nezlobnaya in the south of Russia.
(a) What was the spirit of Isaiah? (b) How can Christians today imitate Isaiah?
In addition, YHWH speaks of the Messianic Kingdom in Scripture and the hope of the anointed Christians to enjoy eternal life in heaven, while the "other sheep" have the hope of living forever in an earthly paradise. (
In addition to arranging flights and hotels, our job is to obtain visas for delegates for different countries.
2 Zechariah knew that these Jews returning to Jerusalem had full confidence in God.
The LORD is our strength.
Although we don't fully understand how you feel, the LORD knows exactly how sad your heart is and will always be there to support you.
These orchestrations allow us to settle down and prepare to listen to the program that follows.
Why is Matthew's account of Jesus' early life different from Luke's?
9 The second example is what God has to say about tripping people up.
Pottery tablets record a complaint filed by a field laborer
Since the Bible has been translated into a language we can understand, how can we show that we value the Bible?
A lap dance is "a dance in which a scantily clad dancer sits on a guest's lap and twists her body".
What do we learn from the way Hosea treated his wife Gomer?
Therefore, it is very important that we cultivate an attitude of Jesus' mind.
4 In the first century, there were those who had accepted the preaching of Jesus and then ceased to walk in the truth.
The Belt of Truth (see paras. 3-5)
Who do you look up to?
If we obey Jesus, we will not judge people by their appearance.
How does God's assurance to Abraham indicate a future paradise on earth?
Peter read it, tears welling up in his eyes, and he asked Donn, "Am I one of the sheep?"
As we continue to cultivate the trait of joy, we will experience more benefits than we can even imagine.
Please use examples of why it is important to learn Jehovah's perspective now.
Our shelter, our strong backing.
Young people must make decisions about education, careers and other aspects.
12 As we study the Bible, it is easy to see that the LORD accomplishes things that are beyond human imagination.
19 Even today the LORD's people joyfully endure persecution or trials for the name of Jesus. (
His passion for evangelism was a good influence on me as a young man.
Jehovah's Witnesses, march on!
Why did the Apostle Paul exhort Christians of Hebrew descent to make a greater effort to encourage one another?
Spiritual people are very concerned about their relationship with God, unlike those who conform to the flesh.
Those who hope for eternal life on earth will fully enjoy the best the earth has to offer.
The pictures depicting Paul in our publications are not based on confirmed archaeological data.
What do you mean, "love without hypocrisy"?
Jason, a young elder, said, "When I was first appointed, I felt a lot of pressure when I thought about my duties."
12,13.(a) What helps us to apply Romans 15:5? (
May we live in a way that shows we are truly walking with God.
As the Bible foretells, the Lord has gathered a great multitude of people from "all the nations, tribes, peoples and languages" who have formed a "strong" nation, already numbering more than eight million.
What is the only biblically recognized reason for divorce? Why don't some Christians choose to divorce?
(1Corinthians 11:23-25) The unleavened bread symbolizes Jesus' sinless body, and the red wine represents His shed blood.
Why were the faithful servants of old willing to wait on the LORD?
How does knowing that Jesus is our Savior and High Priest make us more sure of God's mercy?
15 What helps these brothers and sisters make good use of their freedom?
On January 23, 1962, shortly after the regional convention, I and another missionary, Andrew D'Amico, were arrested at the branch office, Alert!
We can each encourage one another (see para. 18).
John 19:38 says, "Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but he was afraid of the Jews, so he was a secret disciple."
9 One brother from Sri Lanka, who usually lives abroad, gave his land and house in Sri Lanka to his brothers so that they could use it as a venue for meetings and conferences and as a residence for full-time servants.
In order to win the war of ideas, we must see the dangers of propaganda in order to protect ourselves from its effects.
He is able to give life.
8 Why are these two mountains made of copper?
Later, all my brothers and sisters studied the truth and became Jehovah's Witnesses.
But who can truly be loved and blessed by God?
You should sing as loud as you speak, or even louder. (
What are some good ways to reduce worry?
In addition, Enri derives great comfort from reading the Bible, especially Psalm 46, Zephaniah 3:17, and Mark 10:29,30.
The authorities accused these persons of "instigating disobedience, refusal to perform military service and betrayal of the State" and considered them to be guilty of the most heinous of crimes committed with intent to violate the law.
Do you have the courage to recognize Jesus as your King?
Psalm 3:1,2 speaks of the events recorded in 2 Samuel 16.
In addition, the then division superintendent was removed for acting in violation of biblical standards.
Olinda also laughed: "The bus drivers waved at us, and some of them yelled at us from their cars, 'You guys are amazing!'
I am your shield, your strength.
4 If Peter had made his decision only on the basis of external factors, he would never have entered the house of Cornelius, for a Jew does not go into the house of a non-Jew.
I can say I owe my spiritual progress to them."
Some of these preachers had grandparents who had listened to Brother Luke's speech in 1925.
3 The primary reason we preach to people is to glorify the LORD and to magnify his name. (
20 Paul compares the word of God to the sword the LORD has given us.
10. In John Wycliffe's day, why was it so difficult for most people to benefit from the Bible?
8 The supreme dominion of the LORD is important, but that does not mean that we are worthless in God's eyes or that he does not value the arrangements for our salvation.
How does Psalm 118 show that the resurrection will be fulfilled?
B) Why does a person preparing to be baptized need to answer the questions posed by the speaker? (
Soon, my mom and sister became Jehovah's Witnesses, and I was really happy.
My parents immigrated to Canada from Ukraine and settled in Roseburn, Manitoba.
Our last branch visit was to South Korea when we had the opportunity to see 50 brethren incarcerated in Suwon Prison.
In some jurisdictions, underage people who send pornographic text messages can be prosecuted as sex offenders.
The people in Jesus' lineage records were not always the firstborn.
B) How does the joy of Jesus become our joy? (
The world has fallen into darkness.
In fact, if we really care about our guests, we can make each other happy.
John the Baptist sent his disciples to ask Jesus, "Are you 'the one who is to come'?
14 What should true Christians do to be seen as different from the followers of false religions?
Why does the idea of wanting to be recognized become distorted? (
It will soon bind Satan.
15 There are also many valuable truths in the three letters John wrote.
We got up before dawn (as we did in Joplin, Missouri) and quietly slipped flyers or pamphlets under the doors of the tenants.
In order to listen to the speeches, some of the curious audience climbed up the rope ladder on the side of the pavilion, while others climbed onto the sports equipment.
For 40 years, Russell visited congregations and served as a mentor abroad.
What do we do to honor marriage?
6. What can we do to make studying God's Word more enjoyable? (See the picture at the beginning of the lesson.)
Why does the Bible say that truth is like the belt of a Roman soldier?
Mathias would ask, "Who is God?
As a result, President Wilson's Fourteen Points for Peace were invoked in the negotiation of the Peace Treaty of Versailles at the end of the Great War, and the "League of Nations" was founded on the basis of those fourteen principles.
8 Also, the ancient people of the LORD would support financially those who were leaders in worship.
Why is it a challenge for us to practice God's Word?
How can young people use Proverbs 16:3 to their advantage?
I remember seeing a man sitting on the porch one Halloween night, dressed like a Klansman, wearing a white hood and a white robe, thinking he was something special.
What are three ways that we can strengthen our resolve to walk according to the truth?
How does the love of Jesus affect us?
I will protect the faithful.
We study the Bible to find out valuable truths that will make us spiritual beings.
The LORD is our refuge.
Above all, they need the Spirit of the LORD to help them to see things through, to show mercy and justice. (
Jesus was indeed recognized, but things may not have turned out the way Mary expected.
When we show this kind of selfless love, life will be full of joy and meaning.
For several months, Bible researchers continued to distribute the book, The Finished Mystery, to people.
Satan's entire system including politics, false religions, and commerce will surely disintegrate.
3 Paul writes that the "last days" will be an "extraordinary and difficult time".
(A) What is the worst harm done to mankind? (b) Who told the first lie?
Everyone needs comfort.
How does the LORD's discipline help us to live in paradise?
Baptism is necessary to become a Christian
In the first text, we will talk about what it means to be a spiritual person and what we can learn from spiritual people.
Some Bible translations translate "poor" as "useless," "meaningless," and "lack of use.
It is a great blessing to work with faithful brethren
17 Each person who has lost a friend or family member takes a different amount of time to get over the pain.
What is the purpose of this activity?
How can God's peace help us cope with changing circumstances?
Focusing the presentation on the Bible
Savvy advertisers also use celebrities to promote products that people feel they have to have, but we don't need.
Do you judge a book by its cover?
9.( a) What factors might keep us from singing psalms out loud in gatherings and assemblies? (
Now, brothers and sisters feel more honored to be God's people."
3 When the apostle Peter was asked to go to the home of a non-Jew, Cornelius, in Caesarea, some thoughts probably flashed through Peter's mind. (
That is why it is so important to evaluate brethren by Biblical standards, rather than relying on culture or one's own opinions!
How can the principles of Scripture help me decide if I want to play online with strangers?"
5 We can be confident that the LORD will help us.
But the price we pay is nothing compared to the blessings we receive.
In any case, as long as our good friends do not take Jehovah's standards seriously, they may jeopardize our precious relationship with God.
Jehovah's Witnesses are a happy bunch.
10 We can ask ourselves, "Does my lifestyle show that I really know the LORD?
It's really a great opportunity for us to expand our evangelism.
Roger's new congregation is more than 1,600 kilometers from where he used to live, and he says, "The best way to fit in with the new congregation is to get involved in evangelism as much as possible.
19 The Bible encourages us to show hospitality, which improves relationships with others, even with our enemies. (
Would you see the elders' help as a sign that the LORD loves you?
There is no doubt that God will bless parents who help their children.
I was appointed an elder in 1992, which was the first time a Kyrgyz was an elder in Kyrgyzstan.
What is the merchant in the parable willing to do to get the pearl of extraordinary value? (
Thus, the picture we have drawn of Paul's appearance corresponds to the ancient documentary records.
Did they return to Jerusalem just to live in comfort?
Back at Bertram's, the docent asked us, "What's the difference between a meteor and a meteorite?"
This incident and others like it are part of the "Quebec struggle".
According to some of those present, many people have learned the truth through such opportunities.
14 Romans 12:2 exhorts us, "Do not be assimilated to this system, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may test the good and perfect will of God, which is pleasing to him."
In 1983, Arthur announced in the General Assembly the release of My Bible Storybook in Gaelic.
In addition, the truth of the Bible was spread through leaflets and pamphlets to various Portuguese colonies, including Angola, the Azores (Assyrian Islands), Cape Verde (Cape Verde), East Timor, Goa, Madeira, and Mozambique (Mozambique).
On the other hand, Paul must have appreciated the kindness and compassion shown by Barnabas.
If the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. --John 8:36
Jehovah's Witnesses everywhere!'"
In addition, we need to think about how we can encourage our fellow preachers.
What can we learn from the LORD's handling of Satan's rebellion?
It's an exciting story, and it all started in my hometown, in the northern part of Kyrgyzstan.
13,14.(a) Why is it said that politics and religion lead to violence and injustice? (
In fact, not greeting people can be perceived as impolite and uncaring.
*What fruit does a disciple of Jesus need to produce?
c) How does joy help us to preach?
Paul said, "Whenever I am weak, I am strong." What did he mean by that?
Some brothers feel that they are not able to fulfill the work of the congregation.
Brothers and sisters who came from abroad to participate in the program enjoyed their time preaching in Turkey.
Graeme saw his problems from a biblical perspective, as if he were looking in a mirror and seeing himself as he really was.
B) What is the difference between meeting a Jehovah's Witness for the first time and meeting someone who does not worship God?
3.( a) Who are Jehovah's precious people today? (
I also realized that whether a brother has the same skin color as us or not, he is still our brother and is willing to sacrifice his life for us if necessary.
Also, a brother living in the Philippines said, "Being a spiritual person gives me inner peace and helps me get along better with brothers from different backgrounds."
8 When Jesus spoke of his Father, he said, "Every branch of mine that does not bear fruit, he removes."
There's a high school kid named Tony who grew up without a dad.
The next text will talk about this.
After a while, some of his family members also became Jehovah's Witnesses.
Humans have invented many things to make life easier, such as the telephone, the electric light, the automobile and the refrigerator.
19 In England, a couple received help from two elders.
At that time I was secretary to Bro. Milton Hansel, who had worked with Bro. Noel for decades.
10. (a) What do the seed and the soil represent in the parable of the sower? (
28 Joy - a trait that comes from God
Because hormonal contraceptives thin the lining of the uterus, they are sometimes used to treat women with heavy menstrual flow.
What does it mean to look to the LORD?
What do we learn from the way Christ led the 1st century congregation?
Praise songs resounded in all directions.
Why are Jehovah's thoughts good for us?
2 The great Teacher Jehovah teaches us many things through His Word, the Bible.
Have parents helped their children avoid harmful entertainment? (
8,9.(a) What is another reason for our preaching? (
What does it mean to be spiritual?
What are the parts of spiritual armor?
At that time, Tallinn was still under the jurisdiction of the Soviet Union.
10 Let's look at another example of someone who needed to be encouraged, namely, the daughter of Shlomo Jephthah.
1,2. (a) How does the LORD treat people differently from the powerful? (
Today, some parents want the best for their children materially no matter what, even if doing so will jeopardize their children's relationship with the LORD.
Here's what some of them had to say.
Some Christians may feel that they have committed serious wrongs and that God must not forgive them.
The 1944 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (in English) says: "This congress made Jehovah's Witnesses a household name in Mexico."
Shoes of the good news of peace (see paras. 9-11)
Do you live in a way that shows you are a Jehovah's Witness? (
These 550 evangelists who came to participate in the special event distributed about 60,000 copies of the publication in two weeks!
2. (a) From Psalm 34:22, how do we see that God's servants do not have to worry about being overwhelmed by feelings of guilt? (
On June 20, 1918, a jury found eight brethren guilty on all counts.
8 In addition to restoring our peace, God's Holy Spirit can direct our attention to passages that remind us to continue to emphasize spiritual matters. (
In Jesus' time, people were not united by political, social, and racial differences.
When Moses said "we," he probably meant himself and Aaron.
18 Before giving his life, Jesus told his disciples that the Son of Man "will be in the earth three days and three nights".
29 "The righteous shall rejoice in the LORD."
2 The author of Psalm 147 longed to praise the LORD and encouraged others to join him in praising God. (
I pray that they may all be united, as you, Father, are united with me. --John 17:20,21.
Many brothers and sisters serve in areas where more preachers are needed.
In doing so, we have the opportunity to be free from sin and death and to be truly free. (
We'll find out the answers to these questions and talk about what we can learn.
Martha once said with confidence, "I know that at the resurrection in the last days, [my brother] will rise."
Mom grew to believe that the Jehovah's Witnesses were teaching the truth and was baptized in 1952.
But what happens if the woman ovulates and the egg is fertilized?
Whether we read the Bible in print or electronically, the goal is to let God's Word help us change our thinking and behavior.
The first text will discuss the challenges we face in finding out the truth about what is going on, and will look at biblical principles that can help us to more accurately discern the truth of a message.
11 It is not our job to judge people and decide whether they live or die.
What can we learn from God's experience in disciplining Shebna?
Like Jehovah, we hope with all our hearts that others will accept the truth and "live". (
Later, with the help of her parents and other brothers and sisters, this sister reached her spiritual goal and became a regular pioneer.
It also shows that where the LORD and His Spirit are, there is freedom.
Solomon acted with great courage, and with the help of the Lord, he built the magnificent temple in seven and a half years.
May they hear the truth.
They may wonder, "What do I have to do to be saved?"
I know you, I know what you've done wrong, but I also know your heart. I love you very much.'
Please see the "Reader's Letter" in this issue.
9 The second example is what God has to say about tripping people up.
Since the Bible has been translated into a language we can understand, how can we show that we value the Bible?
What do we learn from the way Hosea treated his wife Gomer?
If God can fill the sun with great energy, can't he give us enough strength to cope with our problems?
We can utilize the booklet, Obey God for Eternal Life.
Why can we be sure that the LORD understands the need for comfort for the grieving?
In the 1620s, Lefebvre translated the Bible into the familiar French language.
So when we preach to these people, they may want to hear us preach about hope.
In the past few years, I've often felt sad and depressed.
Praise God with all your heart.
Have you read the last few issues of The Watchtower carefully?
The Belt of Truth (see paras. 3-5)
Contemplating the example of Jesus will propel us to care for others (see paragraphs 10,11)
(Job 7:16; 14:13) Jonah, on the other hand, carried out his God-appointed work, but then the turn of events disappointed him, so Jonah said, "O LORD, now take my life, for it is better for me to die than to live." (
Many have experienced firsthand the truthfulness of the words of Psalm 64:10.
More importantly, he helped the crowd understand that Jesus' resurrection fulfilled Psalm 16:10.
This text will talk about why we need to set spiritual goals at a young age and make evangelism a priority in our lives.
Joseph demonstrated this trait of self-control when he worked in the house of Potiphar, Pharaoh's chief of guards.
The truths we initially learned also include the prophecy of Genesis 3:15.
9 The second example is what God has to say about tripping people up.
Pottery tablets record a complaint filed by a field laborer
A lap dance is "a dance in which a scantily clad dancer sits on a guest's lap and twists her body".
4 In the first century, there were those who had accepted the preaching of Jesus and then ceased to walk in the truth.
So when we preach to these people, they may want to hear us preach about hope.
If I had gone to law school, I probably would have been a lawyer like them.
"Help them to be steadfast in the truth."
Many have experienced firsthand the truthfulness of the words of Psalm 64:10.
More importantly, he helped the crowd understand that Jesus' resurrection fulfilled Psalm 16:10.
The annual meeting began with a prayer by Richard Barber, a faithful brother in visitation.
Danielle began her full-time ministry in Brittany, which is very remote and far from her hometown.
How does God's assurance to Abraham indicate a future paradise on earth?
Speaking at a convention, with a Cebuano interpreter.
2 The LORD showed love to mankind before he created Adam and Eve.
Therefore, we should sit in our seats and listen carefully whenever these music programs start playing.
I also enjoy visiting branch offices around the world and encouraging Berean members and missionaries.
Peter read it, tears welling up in his eyes, and he asked Donn, "Am I one of the sheep?"
All walk the path of truth.
Giving up one's self willingly:Turkey
As we study this text, we also need to think carefully: what can I do to deepen my love for spiritual treasures?
As we continue to cultivate the trait of joy, we will experience more benefits than we can even imagine.
At that time, Moses said to the Israelites, "Must we bring you water from this rock?"
12 As we study the Bible, it is easy to see that the LORD accomplishes things that are beyond human imagination.
19 Even today the LORD's people joyfully endure persecution or trials for the name of Jesus. (
Those who hope for eternal life on earth will fully enjoy the best the earth has to offer.
Jesus said, "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws people." (
I am responsible for obtaining visas and arranging transportation for the graduates so that these dedicated brothers and sisters can get to their area of assignment.
The pictures depicting Paul in our publications are not based on confirmed archaeological data.
Isaiah re-emphasizes that the Israelites returning to their homeland need not be afraid of fierce beasts or fierce men.
Page 26 Biography - The LORD comforts me when I am troubled and anxious.
Jason, a young elder, said, "When I was first appointed, I felt a lot of pressure when I thought about my duties."
But John wanted to help his dad deliver the letter, so he wrapped his bleeding finger in a cloth and went to deliver it.
2 When the couple came back to Tony, he had a completely different idea.
As the Bible foretells, the Lord has gathered a great multitude of people from "all the nations, tribes, peoples and languages" who have formed a "strong" nation, already numbering more than eight million.
(1Corinthians 11:23-25) The unleavened bread symbolizes Jesus' sinless body, and the red wine represents His shed blood.
13. (a) Under what circumstances do we need to show more patience? (
Some of them may be experiencing for the first time the feeling of being cared for. The resurrected person will be filled with gratitude and will treat others with kindness.
To make a declaration to others.
On January 23, 1962, shortly after the regional convention, I and another missionary, Andrew D'Amico, were arrested at the branch office, Alert!
Preparing a radio program at the WBBR radio studio
B) What do we learn from Peter's example and his counsel? (
After that, we drove on to Amsterdam, where we caught a plane back to New York.
John 19:38 says, "Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but he was afraid of the Jews, so he was a secret disciple."
9 One brother from Sri Lanka, who usually lives abroad, gave his land and house in Sri Lanka to his brothers so that they could use it as a venue for meetings and conferences and as a residence for full-time servants.
By what means will Jehovah comfort us?
In addition, Enri derives great comfort from reading the Bible, especially Psalm 46, Zephaniah 3:17, and Mark 10:29,30.
I myself took a flight to Germany and attended the congress in Hamburg.
Brother Ferguson worked with Brother Younger in the division office of the Brazilian Bible Researchers.
How can we follow Joseph's example as we face life's transitions? (See paragraphs 11-13)
5. What happened to Joshua when he was near Jericho? ( See the picture at the beginning of the text)
For several years, they pondered whether to move to a foreign country where there was a need for evangelists, but Perrine could not make up his mind.
Psalm 3:1,2 speaks of the events recorded in 2 Samuel 16.
In addition, the then division superintendent was removed for acting in violation of biblical standards.
What was the LORD's answer to Habakkuk's prayer?
Olinda also laughed: "The bus drivers waved at us, and some of them yelled at us from their cars, 'You guys are amazing!'
We soon accepted the truth. Soon there was a small congregation in Hemsworth.
When we came back to the square again, some people passing by asked us: 'Are you okay?
4 If Peter had made his decision only on the basis of external factors, he would never have entered the house of Cornelius, for a Jew does not go into the house of a non-Jew.
I can say I owe my spiritual progress to them."
How do elders follow God's example of justice in judicial cases?
Later, we were commissioned to preach in an area near the Brazilian border.
A man said to him, "Why have you come here?
Do your best to spread his fame throughout the land.
Therefore, we need to "buy" time from unimportant activities. (
Therefore, we should not let imperfections stop us from singing and praising the LORD.
My parents immigrated to Canada from Ukraine and settled in Roseburn, Manitoba.
Our last branch visit was to South Korea when we had the opportunity to see 50 brethren incarcerated in Suwon Prison.
During family worship, talk to your family about the benefits you have gained from changes in the meeting or in the ministry, and you may find that this encourages both you and your family.
Why do you say we are living in a special moment?
John the Baptist sent his disciples to ask Jesus, "Are you 'the one who is to come'?
(Job 42:5) We can also focus our eyes on the rewards that the LORD will give us, and he promises to bless those who remain pure and faithful.
As we learned in our last lesson, the Bible does not say that a person has to be a certain age to be baptized.
At that time he said to the "rulers, elders, and scribes" of the Jews in Jerusalem, "Jesus Christ of Nazareth ...... You hanged him on a pole, but God raised him from the dead."
The revised translation of Asher in verse 12, verses 12-14, speaks of the blessings enjoyed by the righteous who plead with God for salvation from the hands of the wicked (v. 11).
15,16. (a) Does a person need to be of a certain age to be baptized? Please explain. (
We got up before dawn (as we did in Joplin, Missouri) and quietly slipped flyers or pamphlets under the doors of the tenants.
Footsteps of Jesus Christ.
In 1964, Arthur took a new job as a Branch Servant in the Branch Office in the Republic of Ireland.
In Winnipeg, I met my brother Jack, who had traveled from northern Ontario to attend the convention.
In order to listen to the lectures, some of the curious audience climbed up the rope ladder on the side of the pavilion, while others climbed onto the sports equipment.
Today, Riana still proclaims the Kingdom message to the Tandrona speakers, helping them to recognize the LORD.
His blood makes us
Ask yourself questions such as, "What does this verse remind me of when using social networking sites?
They will be around for a long time.
Explain the meaning of the passage well and give examples of how it can be used.
What happened to Paul and Silas in Philippi? (
Being fully involved in evangelism will encourage you to adapt more quickly to new situations.
16 In addition to recognizing the qualities of the LORD, paying attention to how the LORD actually helps us allows us to "see" God. (
Sometimes it was a bit tiring to preach like that, but Dad would take us out for ice cream afterward as a reward.
8 Also, the ancient people of the LORD would support financially those who were leaders in worship.
After the presentation, Bible books will be distributed to those who are interested.
B) Under what circumstances do we also need to restrain ourselves?
I remember seeing a man sitting on the porch one Halloween night, dressed like a Klansman, wearing a white hood and a white robe, thinking he was something special.
The above conversation took place in 1959, when I was in prison in Irkutsk, Russia.
It's a four-hour train ride from my house to Barekci.
In the days of Jesus, many Jews were prejudiced against people.
If mankind does not obey God, it will have to decide for itself what is right and what is wrong.
Not only will we do this, but we will also ask the LORD to help us promote unity among ourselves. (
Since I could type, I was assigned to the magazine department about a month later.
Spread the good news throughout the four realms.
After Arthur went to Gillette School, I was sent back to Hemsworth as a special herald.
In fact, we cannot prepare for every eventuality.
Stephen stood before the members of the council, who were hostile to him.
At that time, I was living with my mom in Karachi (Karachi).
The next day, the venue was full."
3 Paul writes that the "last days" will be an "extraordinary and difficult time".
A zoning supervisor bought Enri a cup of coffee and asked him to say what was on his mind.
When Gillis looked back on those days, he said, "I told Mathias from time to time that my mom and I loved him very much and often prayed fervently to God for the LORD to help our son understand the truth."
How does the LORD's discipline help us to live in paradise?
More importantly, we can learn how to honor Jehovah, the God of our freedom.
In the first text, we will talk about what it means to be a spiritual person and what we can learn from spiritual people.
See what the Bible says: Daniel 2:44; Proverbs 2:21,22.
How did the LORD lead his people in the days of Joshua?
12 Peter also quotes David's words and audience reasoning in Psalm 110:1. (
In fact, in the days of Noah, "atrocities were committed throughout the land."
He was surprised to learn that our work is done entirely by volunteers and that it is not funded by sales or fund-raising activities, but by voluntary contributions, and said that it was impossible to accomplish so much the way we do it.
10 Please look at the experience of one Japanese family.
For example, King David arranged for 4,000 Levites to serve in the Temple, playing music and praising the Lord.
According to Romans 10:1,2, why was Paul able to persevere in preaching to the Jews?
I was surprised to see Brother Hughes remembering this with a smile on his face.
3 When the apostle Peter was asked to go to the home of a non-Jew, Cornelius, in Caesarea, some thoughts probably flashed through Peter's mind. (
How can the principles of Scripture help me decide if I want to play online with strangers?"
During my first few years in Bertram, I had the opportunity to participate in radio broadcasts on WBBR.
In 1961, this faithful brother moved to Canter, a town very close to my hometown.
Through the faithful prophets of God in the past.
Roger's new congregation is more than 1,600 kilometers from where he used to live, and he says, "The best way to fit in with the new congregation is to get involved in evangelism as much as possible.
The first question is: "Have you repented of your sins and offered yourself to the LORD to do His will, according to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ?"
10 When a young man wants to please the LORD, he will try to preach to people.
Would you see the elders' help as a sign that the LORD loves you?
How did God's ancient people give their possessions to support proper worship?
When the Apostle Paul taught Christians to encourage one another, why did he say to them, "And so much the more"?
Thus, the picture we have drawn of Paul's appearance corresponds to the ancient documentary records.
Did they return to Jerusalem just to live in comfort?
One day John's father asked him to deliver a letter to a friend of the congregation, but that morning John cut his finger while opening a tin pail, and the wound was deep.
What can you do to remain faithful if your loved ones object to your worship of the LORD?
We preach to every family in the region so that they have the opportunity to hear the Kingdom message (see para. 14).
Page 30 How can you adapt to a new congregation?
What do we learn from Paul's account of teaching the jailer?
In addition, the truth of the Bible was spread through leaflets and pamphlets to various Portuguese colonies, including Angola, the Azores (Assyrian Islands), Cape Verde (Cape Verde), East Timor, Goa, Madeira, and Mozambique (Mozambique).
If the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. --John 8:36
How did the Kingdom's message get into and throughout Kyrgyzstan?
In 1995, a group of congregations was formed eight years after we had gone to Barekci to preach.
The LORD has supported me with the "right hand of righteousness" as He promised, and has been with me to strengthen me. (
It's an inspiring story that began in my hometown, in the northern part of Kyrgyzstan.
In fact, not greeting people can be perceived as impolite and uncaring.
More importantly, the Lord will always remember you.
c) How does joy help us to preach?
Paul said, "Whenever I am weak, I am strong." What did he mean by that?
How do we not fall into the trap?
But 13 years after Joseph was sold into Egypt, things suddenly took a turn for the worse.
Brothers and sisters who came from abroad to participate in the program enjoyed their time preaching in Turkey.
Also, a brother living in the Philippines said, "Being a spiritual person gives me inner peace and helps me get along better with brothers from different backgrounds."
In 1988, I served as an interpreter for Brother Theodore Geras at the "God's Fairness" regional convention in Paris.
8 When Jesus spoke of his Father, he said, "Every branch of mine that does not bear fruit, he removes."
Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. --Luke 12:34.
When I was a child, I was chosen with three girls to lay flowers for Adolf Hitler after his speeches.
How can we see Paul's trait of humility in Acts 14:8-15? (
First of all, we must avoid the thought of being exalted, for we depend on the LORD's help to accomplish His work.
Some who preach in areas where more preachers are needed feel the power of prayer.
19 In England, a couple received help from two elders.
Sometimes God's people give for specific purposes.
Looking back, I can see that Irish evangelism has indeed been guided and blessed by the LORD!
We clearly see Christ leading the congregation in the 1st century (see paragraphs 10,11)
28 Joy - a trait that comes from God
What do people say about Paradise?
In fact, the morning I heard the news, I had just prayed to the LORD for younger brothers to serve as coordinators."
If we are not vigilant, we can easily fall into these traps and abuse our precious freedom.
What are some biblical examples and lessons in demonstrating self-control?
2 The great Teacher Jehovah teaches us many things through His Word, the Bible.
After that, I stayed in Onate to preach, while Nora went to serve in another town.
Then, plan your life well so that you can delight the heart of God.
4. (a) Why was Joseph able to endure the pain in prison? (
How do we continue to develop compassion when the people we preach to don't respond well?
However, something happened when I was almost 14 years old that opened my eyes to the hypocrisy of the Church.
After years of studying the Bible, Victoria still had a hard time believing that God loved her.
But what do brothers and sisters do before moving to Burma?
When someone causes us grief, the first thing we can try to do to improve our relationships is to practice the principles of Colossians 3:12-14.
To take a step towards the goal.
8 The loving LORD provides preaching and life meetings so that we can do a better job at preaching.
The 1944 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (in English) says: "This congress made Jehovah's Witnesses a household name in Mexico."
To learn more, read "Youth Ask: Transmitting Sexting - What Should I Know?" on jw.org. (
Visiting Faithful Brothers and Sisters in Africa Fills Our Hearts with Joy
3. Willingness to give up one's own life Myanmar
In 1956, I was sent to Haiti.
2. (a) From Psalm 34:22, how do we see that God's servants do not have to worry about being overwhelmed by feelings of guilt? (
and students at the Killette School
During His earthly ministry, Jesus taught His disciples some basic truths about the consequences of certain attitudes or behaviors.
Why are preachers willing to help immigrants from abroad? (
In Jesus' time, people were not united by political, social, and racial differences.
When Moses said "we," he probably meant himself and Aaron.
18 Before giving his life, Jesus told his disciples that the Son of Man "will be in the earth three days and three nights".
In 2007, at the age of 79, I traveled to Africa again!
Then Arthur, who was with me for 66 years, passed away on 5/20/2015.
In order for the audience to hear his speech clearly, Bro. Lutzfeld also stood on the table and spoke.
Many brothers and sisters serve in areas where more preachers are needed.
What should be done when responsible brethren, such as ward overseers and elders of a congregation, receive guidance from God's organization?
Martha once said with confidence, "I know that at the resurrection in the last days, [my brother] will rise."
This text will talk about why we need to set spiritual goals at a young age and make evangelism a priority in our lives.
Like Jehovah, we hope with all our hearts that others will accept the truth and "live". (
Solomon acted with great courage, and with the help of the Lord, he built the magnificent temple in seven and a half years.
8 Jesus also suffered the loss of family and friends when he was young.
Although we don't fully understand how you feel, the LORD knows exactly how sad your heart is and will always be there to support you.
Joseph demonstrated this trait of self-control when he worked in the house of Potiphar, Pharaoh's chief of guards.
How can I enjoy true happiness?
These orchestrations allow us to settle down and prepare to listen to the program that follows.
Read the Bible regularly
Why is Matthew's account of Jesus' early life different from Luke's?
I know you, I know what you've done wrong, but I also know your heart. I love you very much.'
Jesus told a parable about a loving Samaritan who showed mercy.
9 The second example is what God has to say about tripping people up.
Since the Bible has been translated into a language we can understand, how can we show that we value the Bible?
A lap dance is "a dance in which a scantily clad dancer sits on a guest's lap and twists her body".
What do we learn from the way Hosea treated his wife Gomer?
12 What did the LORD do to reassure his people?
Therefore, it is very important that we cultivate an attitude of Jesus' mind.
4 In the first century, there were those who had accepted the preaching of Jesus and then ceased to walk in the truth.
If God can fill the sun with great energy, can't he give us enough strength to cope with our problems?
Why can we be sure that the LORD understands the need for comfort for the grieving?
So when we preach to these people, they may want to hear us preach about hope.
(Exodus 33:12-17) Today, if the LORD knows us, we too will receive many blessings.
Or think visibility can be used to promote good news?
The Belt of Truth (see paras. 3-5)
They may wonder, "What do I have to do to be saved?"
I know you, I know what you've done wrong, but I also know your heart. I love you very much.'
In 1962, I was in a labor camp.
I preached with my mother and my brother Grigore in a village near Tulum, but we had to be careful and alert.
In the past few years, I've often felt sad and depressed.
I remember that my grandfather showed me some books in Tagalog, like the Bible, and a couple of pamphlets, Protection, Security, and Exposure.
If I had gone to law school, I probably would have been a lawyer like them.
(Job 7:16; 14:13) Jonah, on the other hand, carried out his God-appointed work, but then the turn of events disappointed him, so Jonah said, "O LORD, now take my life, for it is better for me to die than to live." (
I also enjoy visiting branch offices around the world and encouraging Berean members and missionaries.
Peter read it, tears welling up in his eyes, and he asked Donn, "Am I one of the sheep?"
Will I discipline my children and myself to stay away from entertainment programs and information?
As we study this text, we also need to think carefully: what can I do to deepen my love for spiritual treasures?
How can I use what I've learned to help others?"
I am responsible for obtaining visas and arranging transportation for the graduates so that these dedicated brothers and sisters can get to their area of assignment.
Jason, a young elder, said, "When I was first appointed, I felt a lot of pressure when I thought about my duties."
On January 23, 1962, shortly after the regional convention, I and another missionary, Andrew D'Amico, were arrested at the branch office, Alert!
Preparing a radio program at the WBBR radio studio
I enjoyed doing this kind of evangelism with my dad and brother Jerry.
To this day, it's hard for me to explain to people the pain we went through.
I myself took a flight to Germany and attended the congress in Hamburg.
I am your shield, your strength.
I can say I owe my spiritual progress to them."
I used to listen to my mom talk to the preacher and sometimes I went to the meetings with her.
After leaving Haiti, I was sent to the Central African Republic as a missionary.
Since I could type, I was assigned to the magazine department about a month later.
If I had gone to law school, I probably would have been a lawyer like them.
At that time, Moses said to the Israelites, "Must we bring you water from this rock?"
To this day, it's hard for me to explain to people the pain we went through.
In addition, the then division superintendent was removed for acting in violation of biblical standards.
Our last branch visit was to South Korea when we had the opportunity to see 50 brethren incarcerated in Suwon Prison.
At that time he said to the "rulers, elders, and scribes" of the Jews in Jerusalem, "Jesus Christ of Nazareth ...... You hanged him on a pole, but God raised him from the dead."
But why is this conference, attended by only about 150 people, so highly publicized?
At that time, I was living with my mom in Karachi (Karachi).
Let's go back in time and imagine what it was like.
According to some of those present, many people have learned the truth through such opportunities.
At that time, Potiphar's wife had a crush on Joseph, "a man of great stature and good looks," and repeatedly seduced him.
At that time I was secretary to Bro. Milton Hansel, who had worked with Bro. Noel for decades.
At that time, I often prayed and sang Kingdom psalms and imagined how I would preach when I was free, which kept me at peace.
At that time, I was staying with three other brothers at the Missionary Home in Lahore.
At that time, Tallinn was still under the jurisdiction of the Soviet Union.
During the two months that Danielle was not undergoing chemotherapy, she smiled at me and said, "You know what?
In those days, most people learned the basic truths and then immediately took the right action.
Now, Russell and his wife use their past training and experiences to help people in the congregation, much to the delight of their brothers and sisters.
7 During the time of Jesus' earthly ministry, the disciples also baptized people. (
At that time, people under Roman rule were required to pay a "poll tax" of one silver dollar. (
Jewish historian Josephus notes that Samuel was 12 years old.
In 1993, she joined the Russian-speaking group in New York City, which at the time had only about 20 preachers.
At that time, the Ku Klux Klan was rampant, advocating racism and often committing acts of violence.
When I first came to Bertram as a young man and unmarried, there were about 10,000 preachers in the whole country.
At that time, there were only two groups of congregations, one white and the other "colored", or black.
We didn't have much money. How did we manage?
The last time the Bible speaks of Joseph, Jesus was 12 years old.
I thought the local congregation looked like an old ladies club back then.
At that time, racism was prevalent.
On September 19 of that same year, I was invited to work at Bertram's in Brooklyn when I was 17 years old.
I was too young to do it, but I enjoyed assisting them in showing Brother Lu's speech when they renewed their visits or conducted Bible classes.
Although Marie-Madeleine was 80 years old at the time, she happily agreed.
I graduated from high school in 1951 and needed to make a decision about my future.
Adolf Deissmann, a German biblical scholar, said the title "benefactor" was very common at the time.
What can we learn from God's experience in disciplining Shebna?
Like Jehovah, we hope with all our hearts that others will accept the truth and "live". (
It also shows that where the LORD and His Spirit are, there is freedom.
Solomon acted with great courage, and with the help of the Lord, he built the magnificent temple in seven and a half years.
The LORD is our strength.
8 Jesus also suffered the loss of family and friends when he was young.
Jesus told a parable about a loving Samaritan who showed mercy.
What do we learn from the way Hosea treated his wife Gomer?
12 What did the LORD do to reassure his people?
Why can we be sure that the LORD understands the need for comfort for the grieving?
In the 1620s, Lefebvre translated the Bible into the familiar French language.
(Exodus 33:12-17) Today, if the LORD knows us, we too will receive many blessings.
I preached with my mother and my brother Grigore in a village near Tulum, but we had to be careful and alert.
(Job 7:16; 14:13) Jonah, on the other hand, carried out his God-appointed work, but then the turn of events disappointed him, so Jonah said, "O LORD, now take my life, for it is better for me to die than to live." (
The annual meeting began with a prayer by Richard Barber, a faithful brother in visitation.
Danielle began her full-time ministry in Brittany, which is very remote and far from her hometown.
If we obey Jesus, we will not judge people by their appearance.
How does God's assurance to Abraham indicate a future paradise on earth?
2 The LORD showed love to mankind before he created Adam and Eve.
Peter read it, tears welling up in his eyes, and he asked Dunn, "Am I one of the sheep?"
Moses said with a loud voice, "Who upholds the LORD?
At that time, Moses said to the Israelites, "Must we bring you water from this rock?"
14 Caiaphas sent soldiers to arrest Jesus by night.
Why did the Apostle Paul exhort Christians of Hebrew descent to make a greater effort to encourage one another?
18. (a) What words of encouragement did King Solomon say? (
3 In 520 B.C., the Lord sent the prophet Zechariah to help his people by reminding them why they had been released from Babylon.
Isaiah re-emphasizes that the Israelites returning to their homeland need not be afraid of fierce beasts or fierce men.
Page 26 Biography - The LORD comforts me when I am troubled and anxious.
He who does not know God.
Jason, a young elder, said, "When I was first appointed, I felt a lot of pressure when I thought about my duties."
But John wanted to help his dad deliver the letter, so he wrapped his bleeding finger in a cloth and went to deliver it.
2 When the couple came back to Tony, he had a completely different idea.
Danielle was exhausted, and she replied, "Meteorites have longer teeth!"
As the Bible foretells, the LORD has called together a great multitude from "all the nations, tribes, peoples and languages" who have formed a "strong" nation, already numbering more than eight million.
Why were the faithful servants of old willing to wait on the LORD?
How do we "buy" truth from the Lord?
How does knowing that Jesus is our Savior and High Priest make us more sure of God's mercy?
On January 23, 1962, shortly after the regional convention, I and another missionary, Andrew D'Amico, were arrested at the branch office, Alert!
What would you do if you were David? (
John 19:38 says, "Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but he was afraid of the Jews, so he was a secret disciple."
I enjoyed doing this kind of evangelism with my dad and brother Jerry.
I felt as if the LORD was saying to me, 'Victoria, let's work out our problems with each other.'
16 How did Job know God?
Faithful older brethren around the world feel the same way as Cane.
How does the LORD teach us to show self-discipline?
Let the LORD have mercy and hear.
In addition, Enri derives great comfort from reading the Bible, especially Psalm 46, Zephaniah 3:17, and Mark 10:29,30.
Do you have the courage to recognize Jesus as your King?
Brother Ferguson worked with Brother Younger in the division office of the Brazilian Bible Researchers.
These two texts can help us to remain calm even in the face of unexpected transitions and to continue to trust in Christ, our Leader.
5. What happened to Joshua when he was near Jericho? ( See the picture at the beginning of the text)
Satan tries to tempt us with immoral behavior, pride, and supernatural power (see paragraphs 12,13)
Olinda also laughed: "The bus drivers waved at us, and some of them yelled at us from their cars, 'You guys are amazing!'
Our God remains the same.
Interpreting speeches for Brother Albert Slaughter
How will the LORD comfort us?
In 1948, Arthur was again sentenced to three months in prison.
Why are we comfortable telling the LORD how we feel?
Why praise the LORD?
Some of these preachers had grandparents who had listened to Brother Luke's speech in 1925.
In what ways can we work with the LORD?
3 The primary reason we preach to people is to glorify the LORD and manifest his name. (
But, like Martha, are you sure that dead friends and relatives will come back to life in the future?
Therefore, we should not let imperfections stop us from singing and praising the LORD.
However, Jesus instructed his disciples, "Be careful, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod." (
Trust in Christ our Leader
22 Trusting Christ Our Leader
As we will see in the next lesson, these three men were able to remain faithful because they truly knew the LORD.
17 Jesus, too, had been waiting patiently.
Page 21 Let your light shine and glorify the LORD.
How do you make the LORD your "property"?
It will soon bind Satan.
At that time he said to the "rulers, elders, and scribes" of the Jews in Jerusalem, "Jesus Christ of Nazareth ...... You hanged him on a pole, but God raised him from the dead."
Brothers and sisters from different backgrounds serve the LORD in unity.
In these two texts, we will look at how Christ taught his disciples to overcome prejudice and be united.
In Winnipeg, I met my brother Jack, who had traveled from northern Ontario to attend the convention.
Today, Riana still proclaims the Kingdom message to the Tandrona speakers, helping them to recognize the LORD.
The LORD has entrusted me with a task.
For 40 years, Russell visited congregations and served as a mentor abroad.
How does the LORD help a discouraged people?
What happened to Paul and Silas in Philippi? (
16 In addition to recognizing the qualities of the LORD, paying attention to how the LORD actually helps us allows us to "see" God. (
We can learn how to treat people with kindness from the way the LORD treated Adam and Eve.
Catalina did not give up on her goal and worked hard to witness to her coworkers, and what a wonderful result!
Mathias would ask: "Who is God?
As a result, President Wilson's Fourteen Points for Peace were invoked in the negotiation of the Peace Treaty of Versailles at the end of the Great War, and the "League of Nations" was founded on the basis of those fourteen principles.
(Luke 19:1-9) When this unrighteous man heard Jesus preach the truth of the kingdom, he immediately saw the value of the truth and acted on it.
Together we worship the great King, Jehovah.
5 As Paul and Silas sang and praised God, a series of unexpected things happened.
Why is it important to wait on the LORD?
The LORD is our refuge.
Not only will we do this, but we will also ask the LORD to help us promote unity among ourselves. (
After Arthur went to Gillette School, I was sent back to Hemsworth as a special herald.
Luke's account, however, focuses on Mary.
How does the LORD encourage people?
All those who love the Lord with all their hearts.
Jesus was indeed recognized, but things may not have turned out the way Mary expected.
2 However, the Bible assures us that those who seek refuge in the LORD need not worry about being overwhelmed by feelings of guilt. (
Stephen stood before the members of the council, who were hostile to him.
Psalm 147 constantly encourages God's people to praise the LORD.
What important thing did Jesus talk to His disciples about the night before He sacrificed His life?
Jesus obeyed the Father's command.
Even if others don't say it out loud, maybe they're tempted to say to us, "May people appreciate that you understand."
3 Paul writes that the "last days" will be an "extraordinary and difficult time".
Jesus said to the apostles before telling the parable of the vine, "I ...... give you my peace."
Praise the great and true God together with fervor!
When Gillis looked back on those days, he said, "I told Mathias from time to time that my mom and I loved him very much and often prayed fervently to God for the LORD to help our son understand the truth."
23 Work with the LORD every day
More importantly, we can learn how to honor Jehovah, the God of our freedom.
My heart aches that Walter passed away from brain cancer in 2015.
b) How will the LORD help parents to take responsibility for the upbringing of their children?
How did the LORD lead his people in the days of Joshua?
19 You may also be thinking of other situations that may suddenly test our fidelity to the LORD.
12 Peter also quotes David's words and audience reasoning in Psalm 110:1. (
15 Biography - The LORD "Treats" Us Well
3) If we have the right to discipline, how can we imitate the LORD and Jesus?
Page 8 Do you seek refuge in the LORD?
The self-control David showed when provoked by Shechem?
7 How did the LORD answer their prayers?
For example, King David arranged for 4,000 Levites to serve in the Temple, playing music and praising the Lord.
These three brothers and sisters changed themselves because they wanted so much to be like Christ.
According to Romans 10:1,2, why was Paul able to persevere in preaching to the Jews?
Page 17 Joseph of Arimathea Takes a Courageous Stand
9.( a) What factors might keep us from singing psalms out loud in gatherings and assemblies? (
Although learning a foreign language is not easy for Tiffany, it makes her life more fulfilling.
I was surprised to see Brother Hughes remembering this with a smile on his face.
3 When the apostle Peter was asked to go to the home of a non-Jew, Cornelius, in Caesarea, some thoughts probably flashed through Peter's mind. (
Robert was baptized as a teenager, but he didn't take truth very seriously.
5 We can be confident that the LORD will help us.
(Revelation 7:9,10) By attending a crucifixion memorial service, we show that we honor the LORD and Jesus, and how wonderful it is to do so!
10 We can ask ourselves, "Does my lifestyle show that I really know the Lord?
These two texts will make us value the Bible and love its author, Jehovah, even more.
The first question is: "Have you repented of your sins and offered yourself to the LORD to do His will, according to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ?"
10 When a young man wants to please the LORD, he will try to preach to people.
Abraham waited many years for his grandchildren Esau and Jacob to be born (see paragraphs 9 and 10).
When the Apostle Paul taught Christians to encourage one another, why did he say to them, "And so much the more"?
The LORD told Moses to take his staff and strike the rock in the mountainous area of Horeb, and water would gush out of it.
What can you do to remain faithful if your loved ones object to your worship of the LORD?
What trials did Daniel and his three friends face in Babylon? (
In 1983, Arthur announced in the General Assembly the release of My Bible Storybook in Gaelic.
On the other hand, Paul must have appreciated the kindness and compassion shown by Barnabas.
How does the LORD teach his people to have compassion on others?
8 From the account of Jesus' birth, we can learn the LORD's view of material wealth.
First, take time to learn how the LORD and his faithful servants have compassion on others.
What methods did Elias Huttel use to help people learn Hebrew?
6. (a) What has the LORD given us the freedom to do? (
Daniel was born with severe Down syndrome*, and his doctors say he won't live very long.
Satan has been banished.
The LORD has supported me with the "right hand of righteousness" as He promised, and has been with me and strengthened me. (
How did Jesus show that he was not interested in political campaigns?
These words reinforced Maria.
Therefore, if we imitate Jesus, we can continue to show love.
Nevertheless, he believed that the God of life would remember him and would be able to resurrect him in the future.
32 What gift can we give the LORD?
Let him reign as king.
Therefore, it is important for parents to seek guidance from the Lord.
In 1988, I served as an interpreter for Brother Theodore Geras at the "God's Fairness" regional convention in Paris.
There's a high school kid named Tony who grew up without a dad.
How will Junpei and Nao cope with their financial needs?
At that time, Potiphar's wife had a crush on Joseph, "a man of great stature and good looks," and repeatedly seduced him.
When I was a child, I was chosen with three girls to lay flowers for Adolf Hitler after his speeches.
More than 30 years later, Mirjana is still preaching full time and helping people learn the truth together with her husband.
What can we do so that we don't forget to give our possessions to the LORD?
Looking back, I can see that Irish evangelism has indeed been guided and blessed by the LORD!
At that time I was secretary to Bro. Milton Hansel, who had worked with Bro. Noel for decades.
What does it mean to look to the LORD?
Now they could serve the LORD with joy together.
B) What does Paul encourage us to do?
In fact, the morning I heard the news, I had just prayed to the LORD for younger brothers to serve as coordinators."
20 Mary is still caring for her elderly father and continues to be a pioneer.
This text will help us to see that even as our cares, trials, and sufferings increase, our trust in God will surely be rewarded and saved.
Sylviana (left) and Sylviane (right) pose with Duratine on the day of her baptism.
2 The great Teacher Jehovah teaches us many things through His Word, the Bible.
Sister Matilda, who has been a pioneer for 20 years, said, "It gives me joy to know that the LORD will reward me for my efforts."
After that, I stayed in Onate to preach, while Nora went to serve in another town.
4. (a) Why was Joseph able to endure the pain in prison? (
10 Let's look at another example of someone who needed to be encouraged, namely, the daughter of Shlomo Jephthah.
(Psalm 135:4) Hosea foretold that some of the foreigners would be the LORD's people. (
Soon after, Sadiq also became a zealous evangelist.
Therefore, the Bible student who wants to obey all that Jesus taught must stop owning himself and give himself unreservedly to Jehovah.
Do you have good communication with the LORD? (See paragraphs 8-11)
How do they truly know the LORD and remain faithful?
After years of studying the Bible, Victoria still had a hard time believing that God loved her.
Why did Peter encourage Christians to show hospitality? (
8 The loving LORD provides preaching and life meetings so that we can do a better job at preaching.
What gift can we give the LORD?
How can we follow the example of the LORD and Jesus in administering discipline?
During His earthly ministry, Jesus taught His disciples some basic truths about the consequences of certain attitudes or behaviors.
When Moses said "we," he probably meant himself and Aaron.
18 Before giving his life, Jesus told his disciples that the Son of Man "will be in the earth three days and three nights".
29 "The righteous shall rejoice in the LORD."
2 The author of Psalm 147 longed to praise the LORD and encouraged others to join him in praising God. (
Then Arthur, who was with me for 66 years, passed away on 5/20/2015.
In order for the audience to hear his speech clearly, Bro. Lutzfeld also stood on the table and spoke.
How do we develop strong faith like Noah?
For 55 years, Leila has been my faithful companion and has performed various services with me.
Not alarmed by Satan's opposition.
Serve Jehovah, the God of liberty.
These accounts contain important lessons that will help us to remain faithful to the LORD.
Jesus said to the apostles before telling the parable of the vine, "I ...... give you my peace."
In 1983, Arthur announced in the General Assembly the release of My Bible Storybook in Gaelic.
I have given myself to serve you every day.
She will apply the principle of Proverbs 20:5 and wait for the right moment to 'draw out' my thoughts, provided of course that it is something I don't need to keep secret."
Riana said, "This is the best decision I've ever made!"
I've made up my mind that my life is yours.
A lap dance is "a dance in which a scantily clad dancer sits on a guest's lap and twists her body".
Or think visibility can be used to promote good news?
Jason, a young elder, said, "When I was first appointed, I felt a lot of pressure when I thought about my duties."
About 2,000 years ago, Jesus said, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few.
John 19:38 says, "Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but he was afraid of the Jews, so he was a secret disciple."
Jesus replied, "My kingdom is not of this world." (
The authorities accused them of "inciting people to disobey orders, refuse to perform military service and betray the State" and considered them to be guilty of the most heinous of crimes committed with intent to violate the law.
A man said to him, "Why have you come here?
However, Jesus instructed his disciples, "Be careful, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod." (
Not only that, but the same landowner who said "the Chinese will only buy, not sell" is also willing to sell.
5 As Paul and Silas sang and praised God, a series of unexpected things happened.
3 Paul writes that the "last days" will be an "extraordinary and difficult time".
When Gillis looked back on those days, he said, "I told Mathias from time to time that my mom and I loved him very much and often prayed fervently to God for the LORD to help our son understand the truth."
Now, brothers and sisters feel more honored to be God's people."
Roger's new congregation is more than 1,600 kilometers from where he used to live, and he says, "The best way to fit in with the new congregation is to get involved in evangelism as much as possible.
According to some of those present, many people have learned the truth through such opportunities.
Daniel was born with severe Down syndrome*, and his doctors say he won't live very long.
I couldn't get spiritual food there, I couldn't socialize with my brothers and sisters, and as a result, my spiritual activities stopped.
8 When Jesus spoke of his Father, he said, "Every branch of mine that does not bear fruit, he removes."
17 Sergio said: "There was a time when we did not go to the square to preach because we were sick.
Sister Matilda, who has been a pioneer for 20 years, said, "It gives me joy to know that the LORD will reward me for my efforts."
She said, "I am confident that the LORD will take care of me!"
Some Christians may feel that they have committed serious wrongs and that God must not forgive them.
The 1944 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses (in English) says: "This congress made Jehovah's Witnesses a household name in Mexico."
The lower the copper content of the contraceptive the less effective it is."
During the two months that Danielle was not undergoing chemotherapy, she smiled at me and said, "You know what?
He said, "I am grateful that the LORD is so merciful and willing to forgive my sins."
This sister said, "Satan's world encourages people to pursue higher education, fame and many material things.
Jesus said to them, "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, you hypocrites!
Teachers and classmates teased me for following biblical standards," said Daniel, 21.
10 A brother in Korea, who hosted participants in the training programme, said: "At first I was hesitant to host them because I was newly married and my house was not very big.
He said that in the last days, children would disobey their parents.
Romans 15:5 also speaks of having "the attitude of mind of Christ Jesus."
The exhortation of Proverbs 18:13 is apt, as the verse says, "To answer before you hear is folly and shame."
After praying, all of our initial worries and negative feelings disappeared," Ryan said.
In these short verses of John 15:4-10, Jesus uses the word "hour" several times to emphasize the need for patience.
Let's see how some of the Bible accounts give us greater assurance that the LORD can help us in unexpected ways.
In prison, one of the officers, while interrogating me, shouted at me: "We will soon destroy you as easily as we trample a rat!"
Willie said, "Your daddy went to hell!"
The truly meaningful goal is to serve God forever and to do all we can to help people advance spiritually."
One mission evangelist, Stanley Bogus, said, "We were surprised how willing the locals were to help us express our feelings."
15 2 Timothy 3:4 says that these pleasure-loving people completely ignore God.
Jesus commanded his disciples to help people become Christians by "baptizing them." (
Jewish historian Josephus notes that Samuel was 12 years old.
Monique went on to explain why.
She said, "Just praying a lot and asking God to help me."
Stefania from France said, "We learned from this special event that it is not culture or language that unites us, but because we all love the Lord."
Jesus told his disciples, "By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another." (
The Attorney General of the United States indicted these individuals for violating the Espionage Act, which he described as "an effective weapon against propaganda".
As John read the book, he saw that he was reading the truth.
These words encourage us to take action.
6 Seeing things from the LORD's point of view doesn't mean we can't have any thoughts or opinions, as 2 Corinthians 3:17 says, "Where the Spirit of the LORD is, there is freedom."
Daniel, mentioned earlier in this article, said, "When I read the Bible, I pick out verses that will be helpful to the people in the area where I am preaching.
I remember one time when brothers and sisters marched through our town with signs that said, "Religion is a trap and a scam."
The principal of the school, an Anglican priest, expelled me for "deviant behavior."
15 Jesus said of preaching and making disciples, "The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few.
Proverbs 3:11,12 says, "O my son, the discipline of the LORD thou shalt not refuse ...... For the LORD rebukes those he loves."
2 This text will discuss examples of biblical figures who claimed to be for Yahweh, but at the same time did things that God hated.
Today, brothers and sisters who have moved to Burma to preach are appealing, "Please come to Burma and help us!"
Paul said, "I went up because of a revelation."
Mark 15:43 says, "He took courage and went in to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus."
At first, having sex made me feel safe, valued and loved," she said.
The Golden Age (English) says: "There is no doubt that this congress is very important and represents a turning point in the history of evangelization in Mexico."
This series of articles discusses each of the qualities of the Fruit of the Spirit, and will later discuss the quality of "goodness".
In the 1990s, we used to meet immigrants from Brazil when we preached," says her daughter, Sakiko.
Marco, who has been involved in visitation for the past 19 years, said, "There are sisters in the congregation whose husbands are not brothers, and now I can help them."
More than 60 years after the immersion, Blossom says, "I'll never forget that night!"
If anyone of the LORD's people tries to hide his faults, he will not escape the LORD's judgment.
21 Lloyd and Alexandra, mentioned earlier, spoke of how the change in circumstances had put their faith to an unexpected test.
John was so shocked by the cleric's action that he told the cleric, "I will never set foot in the Catholic Church again!"
The name Nabataeus means "foolishness" or "stupidity," and he was indeed what his name implies.
The clergyman soon lost patience, threw the Bible at him in anger, and yelled at him, "You are nothing but Satan!
My wife told me, "I heard great things!
Later, a brother in the branch told me, "Now you will begin to do the work of visitation."
In Matthew 10:11-13, Jesus said, "When you enter a house, greet the people in it.
You may not be accustomed to the way brothers and sisters in the new congregation speak, for example, they may be more tactful or direct than those in the previous congregation.
*Now, Emma doesn't spend much time riding, but instead spends more time doing spiritual work and enjoying time with her God-worshipping family and friends.
Another scholar said that the sun "emits enough energy per second to supply mankind for 200,000 years"!
Although we are Canadian citizens, we feel that we belong to Africa.
When Jesus heard this, he said, 'Healthy people don't need a doctor, but sick people do. '
According to Jewish literature, the family of the manslaughterer was also able to flee with him to the city of refuge.
She said she was thinking the same thing."
For these grateful Jehovah's Witnesses, the joy of being together with their brothers and sisters must have made all the sacrifices worthwhile.
The angel explained that the woman's name was "Evil".
Proverbs 3:9 says, "Use your valuable assets ...... honor the LORD."
Look at what the Bible says: Romans 5:12; 2 Peter 3:9
Romans 8:6 also illustrates the benefits of having a spiritual mind when it says, "Think only according to the flesh, and you will die; but think always according to the Spirit, and you will have life and peace."
(Deuteronomy 21:22,23) The Romans, however, usually disposed of the bodies of criminals as they pleased, either leaving them hanging on poles or dumping them in mass graves.
He notes, "You can find over a hundred examples [of the use of this title] in ancient inscriptions."
Adolf Deissmann, a German biblical scholar, said the title "benefactor" was very common at the time.
A brother named Steven said, "I try to reach my goals and then feel satisfied when I think about how much I've improved."
This text will talk about why we need to set spiritual goals at a young age and make evangelism a priority in our lives.
Like Jehovah, we hope with all our hearts that others will accept the truth and "live". (
Solomon acted with great courage, and with the help of the Lord, he built the magnificent temple in seven and a half years.
Joseph demonstrated this trait of self-control when he worked in the house of Potiphar, Pharaoh's chief of guards.
The truths we initially learned also include the prophecy of Genesis 3:15.
How can I enjoy true happiness?
These orchestrations allow us to settle down and prepare to listen to the program that follows.
Read the Bible regularly
Jesus told a parable about how a loving Samaritan showed mercy.
9 The second example is what God has to say about tripping people up.
Since the Bible has been translated into a language we can understand, how can we show that we value the Bible?
A lap dance is "a dance in which a scantily clad dancer sits on a guest's lap and twists her body".
My brother said, "I just bought this booklet because it was only five cents."
4 In the first century, there were those who had accepted the preaching of Jesus and then ceased to walk in the truth.
If God can fill the sun with great energy, can't he give us enough strength to cope with our problems?
We can utilize the booklet, Obey God for Eternal Life.
Why can we be sure that the LORD understands the need for comfort for the grieving?
The qualities of kindness revealed in word and deed
So when we preach to these people, they may want to hear us preach about hope.
I preached with my mother and my brother Grigore in a village near Tulum, but we had to be careful and alert.
I remember that my grandfather showed me some books in Tagalog, like the Bible and a couple of pamphlets, Protection, Security and Exposure.
Or think visibility can be used to promote good news?
If I had gone to law school, I probably would have been a lawyer like them.
The Belt of Truth (see paras. 3-5)
(Job 7:16; 14:13) Jonah, on the other hand, carried out his God-appointed work, but then the turn of events disappointed him, so Jonah said, "O LORD, now take my life, for it is better for me to die than to live." (
Joseph demonstrated this trait of self-control when he worked in the house of Potiphar, Pharaoh's chief of guards.
Not only that, but the same landowner who said "the Chinese will only buy, not sell" is also willing to sell.
In May 1915, Lusitania was torpedoed and sunk off the coast of southern Ireland.
As Didier, mentioned earlier, said, "Preaching where the need is great trains us to be ready for the future."
Since the Bible has been translated into a language we can understand, how can we show that we value the Bible?
My brother said, "I just bought this booklet because it was only five cents."
The qualities of kindness revealed in word and deed
In the 1620s, Lefebvre translated the Bible into the familiar French language.
I remember that my grandfather showed me some books in Tagalog, like the Bible and a couple of pamphlets, Protection, Security and Exposure.
(Job 7:16; 14:13) Jonah, on the other hand, carried out his God-appointed work, but then the turn of events disappointed him, so Jonah said, "O LORD, now take my life, for it is better for me to die than to live." (
Many have experienced firsthand the truthfulness of the words of Psalm 64:10.
Speaking at a convention, with a Cebuano interpreter.
18. (a) What words of encouragement did King Solomon say? (
Jesus said, "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws people." (
In places where the 24-hour system is used, some people will say, "It's 13:30."
Stephen, a father from Australia, says, "I used to swear a lot or get angry about little things.
As the Bible foretells, the Lord has gathered a great multitude of people from "all the nations, tribes, peoples and languages" who have formed a "strong" nation, already numbering more than eight million.
About 2,000 years ago, Jesus said, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few.
John 19:38 says, "Joseph was a disciple of Jesus, but he was afraid of the Jews, so he was a secret disciple."
Page 18 The word of God shall endure for all time.
During the first year of the dictatorship, some 450 people subscribed to the Portuguese-language Watchtower.
When Gillis looked back on those days, he said, "I told Mathias from time to time that my mom and I loved him very much and often prayed fervently to God for the LORD to help our son understand the truth."
See what the Bible says: Daniel 2:44; Proverbs 2:21,22.
12 Peter also quotes David's words and audience reasoning in Psalm 110:1. (
Currently there are 83 congregations and 25 groups in Chinese, English, Kyrgyz, Russian, Russian Sign Language, Turkish, Uighur and Uzbek.
According to some of those present, many people have learned the truth through such opportunities.
In 1983, Arthur announced in the General Assembly the release of My Bible Storybook in Gaelic.
What methods did Elias Huttel use to help people learn Hebrew?
Daniel was born with severe Down syndrome*, and his doctors say he won't live very long.
So, how can we show compassion to people?
I said, "Yeah, I guess."
So, how can he help us?
Yes, for at least two reasons.
It's clear that Irene really loves to preach!
So, how do we do that?
They may wonder, "What do I have to do to be saved?"
Because hormonal contraceptives thin the lining of the uterus, they are sometimes used to treat women with heavy menstrual flow.
A month before the theft, Riana began discussing the Bible with the two Antandros.
Anyone among the LORD's people who tries to hide his faults will not escape the LORD's judgment.
(Exodus 33:12-17) Today, if the LORD knows us, we too will receive many blessings.
19 Even today the LORD's people joyfully endure persecution or trials for the name of Jesus. (
Today, Riana still proclaims the Kingdom message to the Tandrona speakers, helping them to recognize the LORD.
8. (a) What do some people think today about disobedient parents? (
Today, lying is very common.
Today, some parents want the best for their children materially no matter what, even if doing so will jeopardize their children's relationship with the LORD.
For many people today, money is very important.
There are thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses in Ireland today, and the evangelism there is truly blessed by Jehovah!
He then mentioned 19 undesirable traits that people in this period would exhibit.
The text will help us to see why we should now try harder to encourage each other.
(Hebrews 6:10) The LORD remembers what we have given in the past and promises not to forget our present efforts.
What difficult situations do God's people face today? (
Today, Tulum has a congregation with over 100 local preachers.
Today, there are more than 50,000 preachers of the Good News of the Kingdom of God in Portugal and some Portuguese-speaking islands, including the Azores and Madeira.
How does God's organization use donations today?
Today, brothers and sisters who have moved to Burma to preach are appealing, "Please come to Burma and help us!"
Today, if the people we preach to are not responding well to the Good News, we need to try to understand why they are responding that way.
19 Therefore, Jesus' initial words to the criminal should be translated, "Truly, truly, I say to you today."
8 Today, if a Christian commits a serious sin, he needs to seek help from the elders of the congregation to restore a good relationship with God.
The epistles of the apostles encouraged the congregations of the 1st century, and we can be encouraged by them today (see paras. 12-17).
Today, Christians follow the example of Hannah and Samuel and spend their lives in the service of their Creator.
Today God is calling through the beloved Son.
Nowadays it's bleak.
Why can we trust Christ's leadership today?
9 Today we proclaim the message of the Kingdom, giving people the opportunity to understand God's will for mankind.
At that time, Moses said to the Israelites, "Must we bring you water from this rock?"
"We want you to know that we love you very much.
To enjoy the wonderful blessings of freedom.
We feel more confident now."
To this day, it's hard for me to explain to people the pain we went through.
Grateful Praise to the LORD for His Salvation
Our last branch visit was to Korea, when we had the opportunity to see 50 brethren incarcerated in Suwon Prison.
After the presentation, Bible books will be distributed to those who are interested.
In 1995, a group of congregations was formed eight years after we had gone to Barekage to preach.
We would take our children to preach and attend meetings.
When Moses said "we," he probably meant himself and Aaron.
There are thousands of Jehovah's Witnesses in Ireland today, and the evangelism there is truly blessed by Jehovah!
Like since the 1990s, we've been able to proclaim the Good News more freely, and we've been able to get together in large groups.
They walked about 1.6 kilometers through the town and ended up at our house.
We didn't realize then that in a few years we'd be living in Burkina Faso for a while.
Or is he just a different personality than me?"
Later, Livia and I were married on October 27, 1973, and had the honor of having Brother Noel give the wedding speech.
After the war, my family and I were very disappointed in the church and the government.
Honestly, she's taken care of me for the 57 years we've been married.
In terms of taking care of our family, my wife and I are also very busy because we have more and more children.
Stefania from France said, "We learned from this special event that it is not culture or language that unites us, but because we all love the Lord."
Now let Gloria talk about our life in Pine Bluff. " I really love that preaching area!
In December of the same year, a group of Jehovah's Witnesses came from the town of Angat to preach in our village.
Although our home was often searched, we continued to preach in Alma Vale.
We didn't have much money. How did we manage?
We also made some new friends.
Now there are many more Jehovah's Witnesses there, which makes me very happy.
When we're on a mission, the minivan is our home.
As a result, upon our arrival in Jordan, we were delighted to see a group of people standing on the top floor of the terminal with a banner that read "Welcome Jehovah's Witnesses".
We also had the opportunity to encourage a small group of preachers near Kurganinsk.
But, Osborne says, "The job search didn't go as smoothly as we had hoped."
We met brothers and sisters who had previously been imprisoned for many years in the Soviet Union for their faith.
In order to proclaim the Kingdom, we would hang placards on our bodies and parade through the city.
Our family regularly attends meetings, and we often preach the truth of the Bible to people.
So Mom and Dad invited Brother Atkinson to come and have dinner with us every day and answer many of our Bible questions.
NSC investigators were soon at our door, searching our home, trying to find Bible books.
With my mom and dad in front of our broadcast van.
They may wonder, "What do I have to do to be saved?"
My brother said, "I just bought this booklet because it was only five cents."
I remember that my grandfather showed me some books in Tagalog, like the Bible and a couple of pamphlets, Protection, Security and Exposure.
Page 26 Biography - The LORD comforts me when I am troubled and anxious.
Later, all my brothers and sisters studied the truth and became Jehovah's Witnesses.
Jesus replied, "My kingdom is not of this world." (
My decision is blessed by the LORD
What's another great way to comfort someone?
Even though I often beat people, it doesn't make me any happier.
Soon, my mom and sister also became Jehovah's Witnesses, and I was really happy.
My parents immigrated to Canada from Ukraine and settled in Roseburn, Manitoba.
By this My Father is glorified, that you continually bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be My disciples. --John 15:8
In Winnipeg, I met my brother Jack, who had traveled from northern Ontario to attend the convention.
I used to listen to my mom talk to the preacher and sometimes I went to the meetings with her.
I remember seeing a man sitting on the porch one Halloween night, dressed like a Klansman, wearing a white hood and a white robe, thinking he was something special.
It's a four-hour train ride from my house to Barekci.
I will protect the faithful.
At that time, I was living with my mom in Karachi (Karachi).
Jesus said to the apostles before telling the parable of the vine, "I ...... give you my peace."
My heart aches that Walter passed away in 2015 from brain cancer.
I will guard the faithful servant.
In 1961, this faithful brother moved to Canter, a town very close to my hometown.
10 We can ask ourselves, "Does my lifestyle show that I really know the LORD?
It's an inspiring story that began in my hometown, in the northern part of Kyrgyzstan.
I couldn't get spiritual food there, I couldn't socialize with my brothers and sisters, and as a result, my spiritual activities stopped.
I also realized that whether a brother has the same skin color as us or not, he is still our brother and is willing to sacrifice his life for us if necessary.
Also, a brother living in the Philippines said, "Being a spiritual person gives me inner peace and helps me get along better with brothers from different backgrounds."
Soon, I was also discussing the Bible with my brother's daughter and son-in-law.
8 When Jesus spoke of his Father, he said, "Every branch of mine that does not bear fruit, he removes."
I will rejoice and be glad in Him!
Looking back, I can see that Irish evangelism has indeed been guided and blessed by the LORD!
In 1950, Mom had the opportunity to hear Jehovah's Witnesses preach the truth of the Bible.
At that time, I often prayed and sang Kingdom psalms and imagined how I would preach when I was free, which kept me at peace.
Sister Matilda, who has been a pioneer for 20 years, said, "It gives me joy to know that the LORD will reward me for my efforts."
However, something happened when I was almost 14 years old that opened my eyes to the hypocrisy of the Church.
Honestly, my biggest problem is worrying about a lot of things, and that's something I have to overcome."
Let me tell you why!
In 2007, at the age of 79, I traveled to Africa again!
Martha once said with confidence, "I know that at the resurrection in the last days, [my brother] will rise."
For 55 years, Leila has been my faithful companion and has performed all kinds of services with me.
Over the years, pioneer work has allowed me to experience the joy of serving the LORD."
During the two months that Danielle was not undergoing chemotherapy, she smiled at me and said, "You know what?
He said, "I am grateful that the LORD is so merciful and willing to forgive my sins."
At the age of seven, I was sent to a school for religious training.
I told him, "Jesus said that the good news of the kingdom will surely be preached throughout the world, and no one can stop it."
Other times, I'll tell my son that I need a few days to think about what he's saying, too.
Teachers and classmates teased me for following biblical standards," said Daniel, 21.
However, we soon noticed that most of the local brethren spoke only Haitian Creole.
As a result, I have reoriented myself to focus on serving the LORD."
I said, "Yeah, I guess."
After the funeral, Peter's sister Umi said: "About two years ago, Peter contacted me.
Special Herald with companion (right) in Mistelbach, Austria
I really did, and as a result, I was able to witness to more people when I preached."
In 1979, Lena and I had our fifth child, Daniel.
They took great care of me, treated me like a son, and made me feel very warm.
I also met some brothers and sisters from the Vietnamese-speaking congregation.
They were very angry, and they blamed Moses, so Moses cried out to the LORD, "What shall I do with this people?
I think every family can consider serving somewhere like Myanmar."
Honestly, she's taken care of me for the 57 years we've been married.
Despite my family background, I did not become a Nazi party member or a nun.
17 Biography - My Decision Blessed by the LORD
I was born in this cabin.
Once, I was listening to a talk at ...... The speaker quoted James 1:23,24 and pointed out that the scripture compares the Bible to a mirror, and by reading the Bible, we can see ourselves from God's point of view.
Jesus told his disciples, "By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another." (
I met George Singer in Quetta, a special pioneer of about 25 years of age.
I'm glad I had the honor to do my part in this.
I remember one time when brothers and sisters marched through our town with signs that said, "Religion is a trap and a scam."
The principal of the school, an Anglican priest, expelled me for "deviant behavior."
Even though my health is deteriorating, I still go there two or three times a week."
Should I do this job?"
Proverbs 3:11,12 says, "O my son, the discipline of the LORD thou shalt not refuse ...... For the LORD rebukes those he loves."
Paul said, "I went up because of a revelation."
My kingdom is not of this world.
19 Therefore, Jesus' initial words to the criminal should be translated, "Truly, truly, I say to you today."
Page 8 "The Hope I Have in God"
The LORD is my joy.
Sometimes I would explain something to my son and then give him a few days to think about it before continuing our discussion.
Although I was forced to separate from my wife and my two daughters, I am comforted by the thought that both Maria and I continue to be faithful to the LORD.
We can think, "How would I react to a kingdom message if I were in the same situation as the person to whom I was preaching?"
Will I help my child to see things from the LORD's point of view and not be influenced by the world's view?"
Both my parents served the LORD faithfully until their deaths, and I very much look forward to welcoming them back in the new world to come. (
Have I taken positive action to show compassion to those in need?
Abraham said to his wife, "Please tell people that you are my sister."
I want you to be a happy Jehovah's Witness!"
And I began to think that maybe I don't see myself the way God sees me.
I will bear witness to the truth, for which I came into the world. --John 18:37
I prayed to the LORD that I would never give up serving him."
On September 19 of that same year, I was invited to work at Bertram's in Brooklyn when I was 17 years old.
My food is to do the will of him who sent me, and to finish his work. --John 4:34
19 Jesus said to his disciples, "If you keep my word at all times, you are truly my disciples. You will know the truth, and the truth will make you free." (
Will the decisions I make help me pursue my spiritual goals? (
Will the decisions I make help me advance spiritually? (
What did I do wrong?"
I never imagined that the truth about the LORD God and His will would be so transformative in my life.
My wife was a regular pioneer, and she was always happy.
My wife told me, "I heard great things!
My son has become king.
Since the International Congress was held in 1961, in 1960 I was responsible for arranging charter flights from the United States to Europe, in addition to my original duties.
I started pioneering two years later, when I was 16 years old.
As in my experience, eager young brethren are prone to make similar mistakes and end up disappointed in themselves.
I cried when I heard that, and I apologized to her.
3 pages My kingdom is not of this world
I know I'm learning the truth, so I'm progressing quickly.
"The hope I have in God."
But he also admits, "My health is getting worse, and it takes time to take care of it."
She said she was thinking the same thing."
I probably host 15 to 20 Bible classes.
Gloria has always been very dear to my heart.
After attending a few meetings, the brothers asked me and the others, "Do you want to be baptized?"
My parents had a phonograph that they would use when they preached.
My pre-enlistment picture in 1952, when I was 17 years old.
I remember my daughter, Gursela, who was only 12 years old, loved to preach the truth of the Bible to people on the street.
I don't know what I did wrong." --Janet
In 1958, I changed to a new position, which was related to the Killette School.
Jesus told his disciples, "By this my Father will be glorified, that you continually bear much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples."
Will the decisions I make help me get along with people? (
As a result, my friendship with the LORD has grown even deeper."
One day an elderly doctor, Fred Hudak, came to my home to preach.
Moses said with a loud voice, "Who upholds the LORD?
(Luke 19:1-9) When this unrighteous man heard Jesus preach the truth of the kingdom, he immediately saw the value of the truth and acted on it.
19 You may also be thinking of other situations that may suddenly test our fidelity to the LORD.
17 Young people, think about this: if your parents never correct you, do you think they really care about you? (
Why does God allow suffering in the world?
8. (a) Why did the Apostle Paul describe the work of the ministry as a treasure in a vessel? (
Why have you been preaching so often lately?'"
I still feel unworthy of the LORD's love.
7 Those defenceless Israeli soldiers may wonder, "How are we going to protect our families if the enemy raids the camp?"
One day, Peter asked Dunn, "Why do you bother me so much?
The Attorney General of the United States indicted them for violating the Espionage Act, which he described as "an effective weapon against propaganda".
Mark 15:43 says, "He took courage and went in to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus."
Jesus prayed with them, saying that he wanted his disciples to be one as he was one with his Father. (
More or less, we face things in our lives that cause us worry, disappointment, and pain.
I quickly asked another brother to answer again,well ...... I hope his answer is correct."
The LORD is our strength.
(Exodus 33:12-17) Today, if the LORD knows us, we too will receive many blessings.
We need to remember that the LORD is always looking out for our good. (
The LORD loves and remembers those who are faithful to him, and it gives us great joy to know that.
B) How does the joy of Jesus become our joy? (
We can think: "How big is my bouquet of truth?"
LORD GOD, OUR STRENGTH.
The LORD is our refuge.
Not only will we do this, but we will also ask the LORD to help us promote unity among ourselves. (
In any case, as long as our good friends do not take Jehovah's standards seriously, they may jeopardize our precious relationship with God.
Thus, the picture we have drawn of Paul's appearance corresponds to the ancient documentary records.
This text will help us to see that even as our cares, trials, and sufferings increase, our trust in God will surely be rewarded and saved.
8 In addition to restoring our peace, God's Holy Spirit can direct our attention to passages that remind us to continue to emphasize spiritual matters. (
We'll find out the answers to these questions and talk about what we can learn.
The LORD will be very pleased to see that we "keep on bearing much fruit" with all our heart and soul!
6 We have to tell the truth
Generally speaking, people respond well to acts of generosity.
This text will discuss why we should strive to seek the LORD's approval, and it will show how the LORD approves of His faithful servants, and sometimes He even does so in unexpected ways.
We may wonder, "What kind of people does the LORD want us to be?"
Therefore, we can be sure that the LORD God and Jesus are eager to help us to live a happy life in the future! ( Psalm 72:12-14; 145:16; 2 Peter 3:9 )
If they're not interested at first, we shouldn't be discouraged.
12 If we hate iniquity as much as Jehovah does, then we will be able to see that certain behaviors are wrong even if the Bible does not explicitly say so.
We have to tell the truth.
For the LORD's people, it can be upsetting to have an unconverted loved one oppose our faith.
B) What do we learn from the way the LORD saved Hezekiah?
Jesus said, "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws people." (
8 The supreme dominion of the LORD is important, but that does not mean that we are worthless in God's eyes or that he does not value the arrangements for our salvation.
We got up before dawn (as we did in Joplin, Missouri) and quietly slipped flyers or pamphlets under the doors of the tenants.
In fact, we cannot prepare for every eventuality.
Some Bible translations translate "poor" as "useless," "meaningless," and "lack of use.
There is no doubt that God will bless parents who help their children.
In fact, not greeting people can be perceived as impolite and uncaring.
I told him, "Jesus said that the good news of the kingdom will surely be preached throughout the world, and no one can stop it."
Frankly speaking, no one today can be sure of Paul's appearance.
B) Is there no limit to this freedom?
Why is it that no government in the world has been able to revolutionize the status quo and meet the needs of mankind?
7 Those defenceless Israeli soldiers may wonder, "How are we going to protect our families if the enemy raids the camp?"
We enjoy boundless joy.
However, these powerful people have no way of eliminating war, crime, disease, and poverty; only the Kingdom of God can solve these problems.
4 Jesus said that Satan, the devil, "has not stood firm in the truth, because the truth is not in him".
Why is there no wisdom in opposing the LORD?
3 There is no doubt that our Father in heaven, Jehovah, who is full of compassion, can comfort us the most. (
There is no doubt that obeying the LORD's commands has brought us great blessings.
However, there are still vast areas that have not been visited by preachers.
Soon after, my mother sent me to my father, who lived in the town of Peshawar, 1,370 kilometers north of Karachi.
They're such a cold-hearted bunch!
Although you may not have experienced any of these things yourself, you can get an idea of how the older brothers felt from the account in 2 Samuel.
Nowadays it's bleak.
4 In the first century, there were those who had accepted the preaching of Jesus and then ceased to walk in the truth.
We can utilize the booklet, Obey God for Eternal Life.
Or think visibility can be used to promote good news?
Contemplating the example of Jesus will propel us to care for others (see paragraphs 10,11)
Mom grew to believe that the Jehovah's Witnesses were teaching the truth and was baptized in 1952.
A humble adjustment of one's attitude will result in a blessing from God (see paragraphs 8-10)
We need to remember that the LORD is always looking out for our good. (
We can each encourage one another (see para. 18).
The ransom fulfills our desire to live forever and frees us from sin and death.
Psalm 3:1,2 speaks of the events recorded in 2 Samuel 16.
I can say I owe my spiritual progress to them."
4 The beginning of Zechariah 5 records a special vision. (
The revised translation of Asher in verse 12, verses 12-14, speaks of the blessings enjoyed by the righteous who plead with God for salvation from the hands of the wicked (v. 11).
As a result, President Wilson's Fourteen Points for Peace were invoked in the negotiation of the Peace Treaty of Versailles at the end of the Great War, and the "League of Nations" was founded on the basis of those fourteen principles.
Psalm 147 constantly encourages God's people to praise the LORD.
(A) What is the worst harm done to mankind? (b) Who told the first lie?
In the first text, we will talk about what it means to be a spiritual person and what we can learn from spiritual people.
Jehovah ensures that right worship is not corrupted (see paragraphs 16-18)
Second, think carefully about how we can learn from God's example and what good will come from doing so.
May 20, 1910, Irish Times publishes public speaking engagements
Roger's new congregation is more than 1,600 kilometers from where he used to live, and he says, "The best way to fit in with the new congregation is to get involved in evangelism as much as possible.
The first question is: "Have you repented of your sins and offered yourself to the LORD to do His will, according to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ?"
Abraham waited many years for his grandchildren Esau and Jacob to be born (see paragraphs 9 and 10).
I was appointed an elder in 1992, which was the first time a Kyrgyz was an elder in Kyrgyzstan.
Did they return to Jerusalem just to live in comfort?
We preach to every family in the region so that they have the opportunity to hear the Kingdom message (see para. 14).
First, take time to learn how the LORD and his faithful servants have compassion on others.
Children are not born knowing what is right and what is wrong; they need to be trained (see para. 8).
The second text will remind us how to avoid wrong attitudes so as not to lose the reward promised by the LORD.
The Israelites followed the instructions, and as a result, not only did their faith increase, but they were also spared from going head-to-head with Jericho's mighty men of valor. (
We clearly see Christ leading the congregation in the 1st century (see paragraphs 10,11)
What do we learn from the way Christ led the 1st century congregation?
Why are Jehovah's thoughts good for us?
In the late 19th century, the September 1, 1895 issue of The Watchtower (in English) spoke of the pre-existing significance of the City of Refuge.
To learn more, read "Youth Ask: Transmitting Sexting - What Should I Know?" on jw.org. (
Then Arthur, who was with me for 66 years, passed away on 5/20/2015.
In order for the audience to hear his speech clearly, Bro. Lutzfeld also stood on the table and spoke.
This sister said, "Satan's world encourages people to pursue higher education, fame and many material things.
Shortly afterward, I met Walter Bright, who was the 30th graduate of the Gillette School of Missionary Evangelism.
The first text will explain what it means to shed old character and why doing so is imperative.
This is the first in a series of nine articles, each of which will explore one of the qualities of the Fruit of the Spirit.
4 The same concept can be applied to adults.
9 The advice given by Peter also applies to other important things in life, such as choosing an education and a profession.
The brother's wife was not a Jehovah's Witness, so Gloria discussed the Bible with her.
Each of the nine articles in this series will look at one of the qualities of the Fruit of the Spirit, love, which was discussed in the first article.
15. What do we learn from Paul's words about how to look at younger brothers?
After Zechariah saw the seventh vision, he began to think about many things.
April 3, 2017,The Museum of the Bible at World Headquarters in Warwick, New York, USA is open for tours.
Practice singing psalms during family worship time (see paragraph 18)
Later, Livia and I were married on October 27, 1973, and had the honor of having Brother Noel give the wedding speech.
The second text will discuss several of the traits of the new character and show how we can exhibit these good traits in our lives and in our preaching.
17 We learn from this text three ways to promote Christian unity: (1) we trust God's kingdom to correct all injustices; (2) we will not support either side on political issues; and (3) we will not use violence to solve problems.
We can strengthen our faith by recognizing God's qualities in all creation (see paragraph 17)
The repercussions of these marches were so upsetting to the Catholic Church that they launched a campaign against the Jehovah's Witnesses.
The second text will talk about how the LORD sets an example of forgiveness, respect for life, and justice.
You show compassion by helping others in your daily life (see para. 12).
What blessings do young people receive for trusting and obeying God?
Parents should aim to help their children become Christians (see paragraphs 16 and 17).
2 The year 537 B.C. was a time of joy for the people of the Lord.
The next day, the Portuguese newspaper O Sculo (The Century) also carried a report of Brother Lu's speech.
The next text will talk about this.
We can be sure that Jehovah will answer our prayers (see paragraph 18)
In the second text, we will talk about how to progress spiritually and live as a spiritual person.
Paul's description of the "paradise" he saw in 2 Corinthians 12:4 could have all three of these meanings.
In addition to buying the truth, Proverbs 23:23 also says we should buy "wisdom, discipline, and understanding.
In 1965, Ireland's first international congress was held in Dublin.
What does the content of Psalm 118 have to do with Jesus?
6.( a) What did Zechariah see at the beginning of the eighth vision? (
6 Seeing things from the LORD's point of view doesn't mean we can't have any thoughts or opinions, as 2 Corinthians 3:17 says, "Where the Spirit of the LORD is, there is freedom."
In 1943, Jehovah's Witnesses in Mexico took to the streets with sandwich boards to publicize the "Free Nation" Congress of Divine Rule, which was to be held in 12 different cities.
9. What tools help you study more effectively?
The LORD wants us to have good friends and set spiritual goals (see paragraphs 9-12).
The first text will talk about how transgressors can seek refuge in the LORD today.
Being friends with older people will give you confidence (see para. 11)
The Christians of the 8 1st century also set an example by singing together and praising the LORD.
Therefore, the revised translation of Psalm 144 does not change our understanding of biblical truth.
The servant of the Lord seeks "wisdom from above" and is united in love (see para. 19).
The studio is located on the second floor of 124 Columbia Hill Road.
The epistles of the apostles encouraged the congregations of the 1st century, and we can be encouraged by them today (see paras. 12-17).
The next time you visit someone, start a Bible lesson with them using Lesson 7 of the Good News from God booklet.
The revised translation is more harmonized with the rest of Psalm 144.
I really wanted to tell them about Jehovah, so after a while I decided to learn Vietnamese.
Even though we were Catholics, Grandpa was very open-minded about religion, so he took some religious books and magazines from a friend.
It was a real pleasure for me to assist him until December 1992, when he completed his journey on earth.
On September 19 of that same year, I was invited to work at Bertram's in Brooklyn when I was 17 years old.
Zechariah saw the seventh vision, but what was the situation in Jerusalem?
7 The third reason relates to decision-making.
Whether we remain calm or whether we are impulsive may directly or indirectly affect the work of evangelism (see paragraph 14).
During the Second World War, France was occupied by Germany.
The day after I arrived in Bertram's, I went to 117 Adams Street to do bookbinding-related work.
Although you may not have experienced any of these things yourself, you can get an idea of how the older brothers felt from the account in 2 Samuel.
See Drawing Near to the LORD, chapter 24.
What example from the first century proves that people can overcome prejudice and unite as one?
8 In 33 A.D., the resurrected Jesus appeared to more than 500 people, including men and women, and possibly even some children.
6 The eighth vision Zechariah saw led to great faith. (
One of the ways we show love and generosity is to help our brothers and sisters in need (see paragraph 12).
The first text will explain what we should do if we think the world's viewpoint sounds reasonable and appealing.
15. Please provide examples of the extent to which viewing a movie in one's mother tongue can have an impact on a person.
Jehovah prizes those who hold fast to faithfulness (see paras. 14, 15).
11. What is the impact of the Wycliffe Bible?
The Lord did not forsake Joseph, and he will not forsake you (see paragraph 13).
For what particular reason are we happy?
If we as missionaries are to be more effective in helping the brethren, we need to learn the local language.
Why did some people "sell" the truth in the first century?
What was the "three heavens" that Paul saw?
Ezekiel 8:1-19:14 refers to the "sixth year" of captivity, 612 BC.
If we obey Jesus, we will not judge people by their appearance.
During this time, Diana not only had to endure the loss of her family, but also battled breast cancer.
4 If Peter had made his decision only on the basis of external factors, he would never have entered the house of Cornelius, for a Jew does not go into the house of a non-Jew.
It's also just a brief parting.
Not only that, but the same landowner who said "the Chinese will only buy, not sell" is also willing to sell.
16 In addition to recognizing the qualities of the LORD, paying attention to how the LORD actually helps us allows us to "see" God. (
Not only will we do this, but we will also ask the LORD to help us promote unity among ourselves. (
We are assured that the LORD not only cherishes everyone who serves him, but also loves them very much.
Do you judge a book by its cover?
Did they return to Jerusalem just to live in comfort?
Not only that, but they also slander people and destroy their reputations with malicious lies.
Nonetheless, the pleasure of these things is sometimes short-lived.
8 In addition to restoring our peace, God's Holy Spirit can direct our attention to passages that remind us to continue to emphasize spiritual matters. (
17 Jesus, however, did not just enjoy himself.
In addition to providing spiritual help, some Christians also need to care for family members or relatives who are chronically ill, which also requires love and patience.
16 Christ not only attends to our spiritual needs, but also helps us to focus on the most important work on earth. (
Luca not only explains his beliefs to the class, but also shows them the jw.org website, which results in the teacher telling all the students to go home and read "You don't have to use your fists to beat a bully!".
In addition to these areas, what else can you do to help your new brothers and sisters?
However, because they love to serve their brothers and sisters, they are a little sad at first.
Am I motivated by faith not only to live according to God's standard of justice, but also to proclaim God's standard to others?"
In 1993, she joined the Russian-speaking group in New York City, which at the time had only about 20 preachers.
2 Jesus did not just tell his disciples what they had to do, but why they had to do it.
We should remember that what the LORD can accomplish is not limited to what we ask, plan or expect.
In addition to buying the truth, Proverbs 23:23 also says we should buy "wisdom, discipline, and understanding.
How else can we make our light shine besides being involved in evangelism?
At that time, there were only two groups of congregations, one white and the other "colored", or black.
8 However, after about 40 years, when the Israelites had come to the end of their wandering in the wilderness, what happened?
19 However, it is not only on special days or occasions that the bereaved need encouragement.
However, this is only a Jewish rumor.
(Matthew 3:17) It seems that besides Jesus, only John the Baptist heard these words at that time.
Other than that, what is the difference between a spiritual person and a person who conforms to the flesh?
What else can an elder do than talk and encourage?
14 pages Do you judge people by their appearance?
4 The Jews will rebuild their city in addition to the temple.
8 Don't Judge People by Their Looks
Apparently they describe the time of day in different ways. The
In addition to arranging flights and hotels, our job is to obtain visas for delegates for different countries.
For example, a congregation with 134 preachers has only 50 families in their mission area.
What can we learn from God's experience in disciplining Shebna?
All mankind shall praise thee.
Later, with the help of her parents and other brothers and sisters, this sister reached her spiritual goal and became a regular pioneer.
The LORD is our strength.
8 Jesus also suffered the loss of family and friends when he was young.
These orchestrations allow us to settle down and prepare to listen to the program that follows.
Why is Matthew's account of Jesus' early life different from Luke's?
Please see the "Reader's Letter" in this issue.
9 The second example is what God has to say about tripping people up.
Pottery tablets record a complaint filed by a field laborer
A lap dance is "a dance in which a scantily clad dancer sits on a guest's lap and twists her body".
My brother said, "I just bought this booklet because it was only five cents."
If God can fill the sun with great energy, can't he give us enough strength to cope with our problems?
In the 1620s, Lefebvre translated the Bible into the familiar French language.
(Exodus 33:12-17) Today, if the LORD knows us, we too will receive many blessings.
I preached with my mother and my brother Grigore in a village near Tulum, but we had to be careful and alert.
I remember that my grandfather showed me some books in Tagalog, like the Bible and a couple of pamphlets, Protection, Security and Exposure.
We're going to show the name of God.
Have you read the last few issues of The Watchtower carefully?
(Job 7:16; 14:13) Jonah, on the other hand, carried out his God-appointed work, but then the turn of events disappointed him, so Jonah said, "O LORD, now take my life, for it is better for me to die than to live." (
Who do you look up to?
How does God's assurance to Abraham indicate a future paradise on earth?
To reveal the great and holy name of God.
Mom grew to believe that the Jehovah's Witnesses were teaching the truth and was baptized in 1952.
Those who hope for eternal life on earth will fully enjoy the best the earth has to offer.
Jesus said, "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws people." (
A humble adjustment of one's attitude will result in a blessing from God (see paragraphs 8-10)
The pictures depicting Paul in our publications are not based on confirmed archaeological data.
If so, how is it that the Jews were so quick to put aside the work entrusted to them by God?
What a wonderful message from the kingdom.
Page 26 Biography - The LORD comforts me when I am troubled and anxious.
Jason, a young elder, said, "When I was first appointed, I felt a lot of pressure when I thought about my duties."
But John wanted to help his dad deliver the letter, so he wrapped his bleeding finger in a cloth and went to deliver it.
Danielle was exhausted, and she replied, "Meteorites have longer teeth!"
As the Bible foretells, the Lord has gathered a great multitude of people from "all the nations, tribes, peoples and languages" who have formed a "strong" nation, already numbering more than eight million.
What is the only biblically recognized reason for divorce? Why don't some Christians choose to divorce?
(1Corinthians 11:23-25) The unleavened bread symbolizes Jesus' sinless body, and the red wine represents His shed blood.
They think this way because they fail to see that freedom of choice is not the same thing as the right to decide what is right and wrong.
Satan uses strong-arm tactics such as government bans, peer pressure, and family opposition against us (see paragraph 14)
How does knowing that Jesus is our Savior and High Priest make us more sure of God's mercy?
Some of them may be experiencing for the first time the feeling of being cared for. The resurrected person will be filled with gratitude and will treat others with kindness.
On January 23, 1962, shortly after the regional convention, I and another missionary, Andrew D'Amico, were arrested at the branch office, Alert!
We need to remember that the LORD is always looking out for our good. (
Preparing a radio program at the WBBR radio studio
Obeying God's commands.
About 2,000 years ago, Jesus said, "The harvest is plentiful, but the laborers are few.
9 One brother from Sri Lanka, who usually lives abroad, gave his land and house in Sri Lanka to his brothers so that they could use it as a venue for meetings and conferences and as a residence for full-time servants.
In order to win the war of ideas, we must see the dangers of propaganda in order to protect ourselves from its effects.
He will give you the strength you need.
Applying biblical principles and asking God for the Holy Spirit can help us enjoy peace.
If we know that what we do every day will do our part in God's will, we will be happy.
How does the LORD teach us to show self-discipline?
But who can truly be loved and blessed by God?
Page 18 The word of God shall endure for all time.
The authorities accused these persons of "instigating disobedience, refusal to perform military service and betrayal of the State" and considered them to be guilty of the most heinous of crimes committed with intent to violate the law.
Brother Ferguson worked with Brother Younger in the division office of the Brazilian Bible Researchers.
5. What happened to Joshua when he was near Jericho? ( See the picture at the beginning of the text)
How can we do our part to keep God's organization clean?
Psalm 3:1,2 speaks of the events recorded in 2 Samuel 16.
In addition to this, the then division superintendent was removed for acting in violation of biblical standards.
During this time, Diana not only had to endure the loss of her family, but also battled breast cancer.
2 This text will talk about what we can do to love and value God's kingdom, evangelism, and biblical truth more.
Interpreting speeches for Brother Albert Slaughter
The LORD loves and remembers those who are faithful to him, and it gives us great joy to know that.
God's joy gives me strength.
I am your shield, your strength.
In order for the elders to judge people justly as God does, they must find out if the manslaughterer acted with hatred or malice. (
God's joy gives me strength.
The brother explained to the ambassador in a respectful manner and dispelled the ambassador's misunderstanding and prejudice against us.
We should focus on the blessings we have and wait patiently for the hope that lies ahead.
How do people who have lost a friend or family member get over the pain? (
Later, we were commissioned to preach in an area near the Brazilian border.
These 3 towns alone have 50 congregations, over 5400 preachers, and 1 in 4 residents are Jehovah's Witnesses!
Some of these preachers had grandparents who had listened to Brother Luke's speech in 1925.
Do your best to spread his fame throughout the land.
20 Paul compares the word of God to the sword the LORD has given us.
This text offers biblical counsel to help you make good plans for a better future.
10. In John Wycliffe's day, why was it so difficult for most people to benefit from the Bible?
I'm looking forward to the kingdom come, and I'm looking forward to the kingdom come.
B) Why does a person preparing to be baptized need to answer the questions posed by the speaker? (
9 There were also older and infirm brothers and sisters in the Bertram family.
However, Jesus instructed his disciples, "Be careful, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod." (
My parents immigrated to Canada from Ukraine and settled in Roseburn, Manitoba.
Later, when the NSC chief came, the investigators told him that they had been treated kindly.
Let's look at an example of a father.
The people in Jesus' lineage records were not always the firstborn.
11 The Bible describes individuals who, because of a lack of self-control, have engaged in sexually deviant behavior.
During family worship, talk to your family about the benefits you have gained from the change in meeting or preaching, and you may find that this encourages you as well as your family.
B) How does the joy of Jesus become our joy? (
How did these older elders react to this arrangement?
By doing so, the elders showed that they wanted to be guided by God and Jesus.
We can think: "How big is my bouquet of truth?"
13 Biography - Determined Not to Be Discouraged
Zealously proclaiming the Kingdom of God.
14 What should true Christians do to be seen as different from the followers of false religions?
Why does the idea of wanting to be recognized become distorted? (
LORD GOD, OUR STRENGTH.
At that time he said to the "rulers, elders, and scribes" of the Jews in Jerusalem, "Jesus Christ of Nazareth ...... You hanged him on a pole, but God raised him from the dead."
6,7. (a) Why are religious leaders said to be highly culpable? (
The revised translation of Asher in verse 12, verses 12-14, speaks of the blessings enjoyed by the righteous who plead with God for salvation from the hands of the wicked (v. 11).
Brothers and sisters from different backgrounds serve the LORD in unity.
We got up before dawn (as we did in Joplin, Missouri) and quietly slipped flyers or pamphlets under the doors of the tenants.
In 1964, Arthur took a new job as a Branch Servant in the Branch Office in the Republic of Ireland.
In Winnipeg, I met my brother Jack, who had traveled from northern Ontario to attend the convention.
In order to listen to the speeches, some of the curious audience climbed up the rope ladder on the side of the pavilion, while others climbed onto the sports equipment.
Today, Riana still proclaims the Kingdom message to the Tandrona speakers, helping them to recognize the LORD.
Problems also arise when people are proud of their race.
For the past 40 years, Olaf has served in various locations as a missionary evangelist.
Helping Brothers and Sisters with Unchurched Spouses
6. What can we do to make studying God's Word more enjoyable? (See the picture at the beginning of the lesson.)
Explain the meaning of the passage well and give examples of how it can be used.
Why does the Bible say that truth is like the belt of a Roman soldier?
How do we show that we have the mind of the LORD and that we do not stumble?
As a result, President Wilson's Fourteen Points for Peace were invoked in the negotiation of the Peace Treaty of Versailles at the end of the Great War, and the "League of Nations" was founded on the basis of those fourteen principles.
"Don't say: 'Why were the old days better than now?'
After the presentation, Bible books will be distributed to those who are interested.
b) According to Romans 12:2, why should we not assimilate the ideas of the world?
Why is it a challenge for us to practice God's Word?
(Luke 19:1-9) When this unrighteous man heard Jesus preach the truth of the kingdom, he immediately saw the value of the truth and acted on it.
After leaving Haiti, I was sent to the Central African Republic as a missionary.
1918 - Looking back a century ago
I remember seeing a man sitting on the porch one Halloween night, dressed like a Klansman, wearing a white hood and a white robe, thinking he was something special.
The above conversation took place in 1959, when I was in prison in Irkutsk, Russia.
Page 22 Seeing Through the Enemy's Tricks
During the first year of the dictatorship, some 450 people subscribed to the Portuguese-language Watchtower.
In the days of Jesus, many Jews were prejudiced against people.
The LORD is our refuge.
Not only will we do this, but we will also ask the LORD to help us promote unity among ourselves. (
Since I could type, I was assigned to the magazine department about a month later.
What can we do to avoid being influenced by wrong desires?
Above all, they need the Spirit of the LORD to help them to see things through, to show mercy and justice. (
12 What if we are slandered by others?
2 However, the Bible assures us that those who seek refuge in the LORD need not worry about being overwhelmed by feelings of guilt. (
Because of the recession, everyone's life is simple.
Stephen stood before the members of the council, who were hostile to him.
Psalm 147 constantly encourages God's people to praise the LORD.
Are you helping your family and brothers and sisters to stay close to the LORD's organization? (
What important thing did Jesus talk to His disciples about the night before He sacrificed His life?
No one can count all the stars in the universe.
Even if people don't say it out loud, maybe they want to say to us, "May it be appreciated that you understand."
Jesus said to the apostles before telling the parable of the vine, "I ...... give you my peace."
What tools are in the "teaching toolbox"?
18. What should we do if we know that a brother or sister has committed a serious violation of biblical standards?
What did a brother see that he had overlooked? What did he do?
Baptism is necessary to become a Christian
My heart aches that Walter passed away in 2015 from brain cancer.
In the first text, we will talk about what it means to be a spiritual person and what we can learn from spiritual people.
See what the Bible says: Daniel 2:44; Proverbs 2:21,22.
b) How will the LORD help parents to take responsibility for the upbringing of their children?
These two texts will help us understand how important Jehovah's supreme dominion is and how we can embrace God's supreme dominion.
15 Biography - The LORD "Treats" Us Well
17 Each person who has lost a friend or family member takes a different amount of time to get over the pain.
How can God's peace help us cope with changing circumstances?
Second, think carefully about how we can learn from God's example and what good will come from doing so.
10 Please look at the experience of one Japanese family.
How can Bible study help you and your family develop self-control?
Focusing the presentation on the Bible
Savvy advertisers also use celebrities to promote products that people feel they have to have, but we don't need.
The self-control David showed when he was angered by Shechem?
Do you judge a book by its cover?
Page 17 Joseph of Arimathea Takes a Courageous Stand
We preach patiently to people, and some of them may eventually respond favorably.
Now, brothers and sisters feel more honored to be God's people."
Currently there are 83 congregations and 25 groups in Chinese, English, Kyrgyz, Russian, Russian Sign Language, Turkish, Uighur and Uzbek.
During this difficult period, a number of conferences were organized in order to strengthen the confidence of the whole community of brethren. The
3 When the apostle Peter was asked to go to the home of a non-Jew, Cornelius, in Caesarea, some thoughts probably flashed through Peter's mind. (
From this we can see that it is important to have good Christian character in preaching.
May 20, 1910, Irish Times publishes public speaking engagements
That is why it is so important to evaluate brethren by Biblical standards, rather than relying on culture or one's own opinions!
How can the principles of Scripture help me decide if I want to play online with strangers?"
How can we put the principles of Philippians 2:1-4 to work?
During my first few years in Bertram, I had the opportunity to participate in radio broadcasts on WBBR.
(Revelation 7:9,10) By attending a crucifixion memorial service, we show that we honor the LORD and Jesus, and how wonderful it is to do so!
In any case, as long as our good friends do not take Jehovah's standards seriously, they may jeopardize our precious relationship with God.
The first question is: "Have you repented of your sins and offered yourself to the LORD to do His will, according to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ?"
We usually did public witnessing on Saturday afternoons, which we called street witnessing at the time.
Would you see the elders' help as a sign that the LORD loves you?
How did God's ancient people give their possessions to support proper worship?
What should we think about people inviting us to dinner?
There is no doubt that God will bless parents who help their children.
20 Young man, cherish the freedom God has given you.
And the LORD told Moses to take his staff and strike the rock in the mountainous region of Horeb, and water would gush out of it.
Thus, the picture we have drawn of Paul's appearance corresponds to the ancient documentary records.
We're happy to do God's will.
Did they return to Jerusalem just to live in comfort?
Back at Bertram's, the docent asked us, "What's the difference between a meteor and a meteorite?"
We preach to every family in the region so that they have the opportunity to hear the Kingdom message (see para. 14).
This incident and others like it are part of the "Quebec struggle".
According to some of those present, many people have learned the truth through such opportunities.
14 Romans 12:2 exhorts us, "Do not be assimilated to this system, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may test the good and perfect will of God, which is pleasing to him."
In 1983, Arthur announced in the General Assembly the release of My Bible Storybook in Gaelic.
What can we do to develop self-discipline?
In addition, the truth of the Bible was spread through leaflets and pamphlets to various Portuguese colonies, including Angola, the Azores (Assyrian Islands), Cape Verde (Cape Verde), East Timor, Goa, Madeira, and Mozambique (Mozambique).
B) How can we encourage children and new members of the congregation to support the work of the kingdom?
What will happen in the future.
If the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. --John 8:36
We must have the right motives - love for God and love for others - in order to persevere in the work God has entrusted to us.
How did the Kingdom's message get into and throughout Kyrgyzstan?
Daniel was born with severe Down syndrome*, and his doctors say he won't live very long.
In 1995, a group of congregations was formed eight years after we had gone to Barekage to preach.
It also shows that where the LORD and His Spirit are, there is freedom.
So when we preach to these people, they may want to hear us preach about hope.
(Exodus 33:12-17) Today, if the LORD knows us, we too will receive many blessings.
If I had gone to law school, I probably would have been a lawyer like them.
Therefore, we should sit in our seats and listen carefully whenever these music programs start playing.
As we study this text, we also need to think carefully: what can I do to deepen my love for spiritual treasures?
As we continue to cultivate the trait of joy, we will experience more benefits than we can even imagine.
We do this not only to show that we value this precious gift, but also to show that we love Jehovah, the author of the Bible.
12 As we study the Bible, it is easy to see that the LORD accomplishes things that are beyond human imagination.
Jesus said, "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws people." (
They think this way because they fail to see that freedom of choice is not the same thing as the right to decide what is right and wrong.
What would you do if you were David? (
If we know that what we do every day will do our part in God's will, we will be happy.
If Noah's mother and siblings were alive when the flood came, it appears that they did not survive the disaster.
How can we follow Joseph's example as we face life's transitions? (See paragraphs 11-13)
4 If Peter had made his decision only on the basis of external factors, he would never have entered the house of Cornelius, for a Jew does not go into the house of a non-Jew.
How do elders follow God's example of justice in judicial cases?
10. In John Wycliffe's day, why was it so difficult for most people to benefit from the Bible?
In some jurisdictions, underage people who send pornographic text messages can be prosecuted as sex offenders.
In fact, if we really care about our guests, we can make each other happy.
John the Baptist sent his disciples to ask Jesus, "Are you 'the one who is to come'?
17. (a) What good will it do us to think about how the LORD cares for his people? (
16 In addition to recognizing the qualities of the LORD, paying attention to how the LORD actually helps us allows us to "see" God. (
If mankind does not obey God, it will have to decide for itself what is right and what is wrong.
As a Christian, you will teach your children to obey the Bible's command, "Honor your father and mother." (
When we show this kind of selfless love, life will be full of joy and meaning.
12 What if we are slandered by others?
When I think back to the times when I served full time, I can feel in my heart that the Lord has blessed both of us more than we could have imagined.
Even if others don't say it out loud, maybe they'd like to say to us, "May it be appreciated that you understand."
18. What should we do if we know that a brother or sister has committed a serious violation of biblical standards?
3) If we have the right to discipline, how can we imitate the LORD and Jesus?
If you want to do more for the LORD, what are the service opportunities?
From this we can see that it is important to have good Christian character in preaching.
How can the principles of Scripture help me decide if I want to play online with strangers?"
In any case, as long as our good friends do not take Jehovah's standards seriously, they may jeopardize our precious relationship with God.
19 The Bible encourages us to show hospitality, which improves relationships with others, even with our enemies. (
17. (a) What price might we have to pay to buy the truth? (
What can you do to remain faithful if your loved ones object to your worship of the LORD?
In this way, we can willingly forgive the offender even if he does not realize that he has offended us. (
On the other hand, Paul must have appreciated the kindness and compassion shown by Barnabas.
B) How can we encourage children and new members of the congregation to support the work of the kingdom?
If the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. --John 8:36
In fact, not greeting people can be perceived as impolite and uncaring.
10 If you use the phrase "What do you think the future holds?
Therefore, if we imitate Jesus, we can continue to show love.
B) What is the difference between meeting a Jehovah's Witness for the first time and meeting someone who does not worship God?
I also realized that whether a brother has the same skin color as us or not, he is still our brother and is willing to sacrifice his life for us if necessary.
Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. --Luke 12:34.
When I was a child, I was chosen with three girls to lay flowers for Adolf Hitler after his speeches.
First of all, we must avoid the thought of being exalted, for we depend on the LORD's help to accomplish His work.
1,2.( a) What might be the result of a lack of self-control? (
At that time, I often prayed and sang Kingdom psalms and imagined how I would preach when I was free, which kept me at peace.
This text will help us to see that even as our cares, trials, and sufferings increase, our trust in God will surely be rewarded and saved.
If we are not vigilant, we can easily fall into these traps and abuse our precious freedom.
How do we continue to develop compassion when the people we preach to don't respond well?
When someone causes us grief, the first thing we can try to do to improve our relationships is to practice the principles of Colossians 3:12-14.
How can we follow the example of the LORD and Jesus in administering discipline?
17 How long should we stay when we visit?
If you haven't already done so, think about why it's important to do so.
You'll see later.
What should be done when responsible brethren, such as ward overseers and elders of a congregation, receive guidance from God's organization?
Many people who are not Christians appear to be of good character and have done nothing against the law.
The lower the copper content of the contraceptive the less effective it is."
However, if you give up serving the LORD because you are discouraged, you will soon realize that the people of this world do not care about you as much as your Christian parents and your brothers and sisters in the congregation do.
For example, some teens may be attracted to the things of this world, and they may begin to wonder if living by biblical principles is really the best thing to do? (
So, what are the other benefits of cultivating love?
17 Young people, think about this: if your parents never corrected you, do you think they really cared about you? (
15 We are more assured of the Lord's mercy than the ancient Israelites.
4. (a) What happens if we let the world influence our thoughts? (
Every time I overcome temptation, I feel happy!"
15 If a child expresses a desire to be baptized, parents should help them to think carefully about what their Christian responsibilities are and how the child perceives them.
If one was enough, there wouldn't be so many flowers.
For Solomon to accomplish this task, he must be brave and strong and take action.
For more information on how to raise a child when a husband and wife have different beliefs, please see the "Reader's Letter" in the August 15, 2002 issue of The Watchtower.
Generally speaking, people respond well to acts of generosity.
15 We cannot allow ourselves to be "assimilated into the system" if we want to see things the same way as Jehovah.
If the manslaughterer had not fled to one of the cities of refuge established by the Lord, the closest relatives of the deceased would have been authorized to put the manslaughterer to death.
8 If we want our names to be recorded in the book of the LORD, we must fulfill certain conditions.
If we try to resolve disputes or disagreements with the goal of promoting harmony, we may achieve unexpectedly good results.
By all means, focus on their strengths, just as you would want others to focus on yours.
What can we do to imitate Jesus when others spread false news about us?
7 Those defenceless Israeli soldiers may wonder, "How are we going to protect our families if the enemy raids the camp?"
1,2. (a) What might a Christian parent think of when he knows that his child wants to be baptized? (a) What might a Christian parent think when he knows that his child wants to be baptized?
It is noteworthy that singing played an important part in the worship of the ancient Israelites as they faithfully served the Lord.
When we show humility and try to promote harmony, it usually works out well.
If they're not interested at first, we shouldn't be discouraged.
12 If we hate iniquity as much as Jehovah does, then we will be able to see that certain behaviors are wrong even if the Bible does not explicitly say so.
17 When the Kingdom of God comes, no one will have to pay rent, mortgage, medical expenses or spend money on food or worry about not having enough food.
If we love the LORD as well as our brothers and sisters, we will endeavor not to allow personality differences to disrupt the peace of God's people.
For the LORD's people, it can be upsetting to have an unconverted relative oppose our faith.
If a family member has forsaken the LORD, what can help you overcome the hurt?
What blessings do young people receive for trusting and obeying God?
No matter how people react.
Do you imitate the LORD in your dealings with others? (
14,15. (a) What should we think about if we want to see things the same way as the LORD? (
Why should we be careful when receiving or forwarding emails and text messages?
Concerning this, Peter said, "Being obedient children, do not be ruled again by the desires of the former times of your ignorance, after the manner of those days; but ...... be holy in all your conduct." (
13 When religion and politics are closely intertwined, it can easily lead to violence.
What if the Bible isn't the Word of God?
Why should we listen to our Creator when deciding our life goals? (
Even if it's not a big house, can you provide lodging?
13 If one of the partners in a Christian couple commits adultery, the innocent partner has a decision to make.
15 If we see that Christ is leading us, we will sense that He cares about our spiritual progress.
Jesus told his disciples, "By this all men will know that you are my disciples, if you love one another." (
How can contemplating God's perspective help us prepare for the trials we may face?
Sometimes I'm afraid to back out.
A soldier who is not loyal to his commander cannot give his best on the battlefield.
If you are starting a new job, keep a positive attitude.
9 What, then, must we bring forth?
Some years later, the Apostle Paul also emphasized this truth and pointed out that giving should be done from the right motives.
16. On what grounds should we not be generous?
If we knew the answer to this question, we could look forward to the time of the future resurrection as much as Martha does.
Daniel, mentioned earlier in this article, said, "When I read the Bible, I pick out verses that will be helpful to the people in the area where I am preaching.
If so, we might start by witnessing on the streets, in public places, or by renewing visits to those who have already risen.
In the run-up to Pascha, we are asked to think deeply about the meaning of unleavened bread and red wine, especially on the evening of that day. (
We are all imperfect people and inevitably feel stressed when going through changes in our lives and service positions.
We are never tested because the LORD is displeased with us.
B) If only one of the spouses is a God-worshipper, what should be done when the marriage is tested?
What can we do when we find life's pressures too much to bear?
17 Many preachers who serve full-time can attest that focusing on their work helps them to maintain a happy and positive attitude even when circumstances change.
The following biblical examples will give us an idea of how greetings can do more than just make people feel welcome.
Can a Christian make a decision and then change it?
If you are a young person, many people have probably given you a lot of advice about your future.
18 Married Christians who love the LORD imitate him.
17 Are you willing to receive more training in order to do a better job in serving God?
How can we keep our eyes focused on the LORD as we face life's overwhelming challenges?
But what happens if the woman ovulates and the egg is fertilized?
Whether you are a young person who has been baptized or one who is planning to be baptized, if you want to increase your friendship with the LORD, what can you do?
(John 3:19) However, with the help of God's Holy Spirit, we can preach the Good News to people in a gentle and respectful manner, and in doing so, we are doing what Jesus told us to do.
If you are facing such a situation, what can you do to regain your joy?
Some parents, though not interested in the truth, allow Christians to teach their children.
We can think, "How would I react to a kingdom message if I were in the same situation as the person to whom I was preaching?"
8 Today, if a Christian commits a serious sin, he needs to seek help from the elders of the congregation to restore a good relationship with God.
However, Diana was always very joyful when brothers and sisters from the congregation saw her in the Kingdom Hall or at the mission field.
18 What should you do if you know that a brother or sister has done something that seriously violates biblical standards?
18 Those who make heavenly friends will also bear other valuable estates.
To find the answer to this question, we need to understand what true joy is and why some people remain joyful in the face of trials.
A long time ago, a Psalmist recognized the need for mankind to look to Yahweh in times of trouble. (
The next time you visit someone, start a Bible lesson with them using Lesson 7 of the Good News from God booklet.
What are the conditions that must be met if we want our names to be recorded in the LORD's book?
If we love God's kingdom, what would we want to do?
Why does judging people based on their financial situation cause problems?
What can be done when a marriage is tested? (see para. 15)
9 Parents disciplining their children lovingly will make them feel secure.
Once the relevant evidence of the matter has been ascertained, the Council of Elders will decide whether to establish a judicial commission.
11 You can be sure that by worshipping the LORD you will have many good friends from all over the world, some of whom you have never even met!
Why does focusing on evangelism help us so much when circumstances change?
Why should immigrant parents consider language-related matters when helping their children spiritually?
When I came home to visit my parents, I would help with the dishes after dinner with Arthur.
19 Jesus said to his disciples, "If you keep my word at all times, you are truly my disciples. You will know the truth, and the truth will make you free." (
I was too young to do it, but I enjoyed assisting them in showing Brother Lu's speech when they renewed their visits or conducted Bible classes.
Moses' words show that he has no respect for the LORD, for he does not attribute the power to perform miracles to the LORD.
"When will the next convention be held?"
4 If you are discouraged from preaching in unresponsive areas, consider the experience of the Apostle Paul.
Whether we remain calm or whether we are impulsive may directly or indirectly affect the work of evangelism (see paragraph 14).
19 As in some of the examples mentioned above, if we do our best and wait in faith for the LORD, we will be able to keep our inner peace. (
How can we keep a calm heart and continue to trust the LORD with all our heart when change happens?
In Matthew 10:11-13, Jesus said, "When you enter a house, greet the people in it.
These two texts show that the LORD always encourages his faithful servants, and that his faithful servants follow his example of encouraging others in all times.
We can imitate the LORD and not worry too much because things don't turn out the way we expect.
17 If we want to be satisfied, we must listen to the teachings of Jesus.
If you have children, ask God to give you the Holy Spirit to help you discipline your children in love rather than in anger.
How did Philip the evangelist continue to focus on evangelism even when circumstances changed?
What blessings will Daniel receive in the future?
In Thailand, for example, a man attending a regional conference was moved by the genuine love shown by his brothers and sisters.
One of the ways we show love and generosity is to help our brothers and sisters in need (see paragraph 12).
If the egg cannot be fertilized, no new life will result.
The first text will explain what we should do if we think the world's viewpoint sounds reasonable and appealing.
B) Tell us how you set aside time to read the Bible.
We have encountered many challenges in our preaching.
The book of Habakkuk tells us how to continue to trust in the LORD in times of trouble.
17. (a) What do we have to do to be satisfied? (
11. (a) What do we need to do to become spiritual people? (
When we use the principles of the Bible and ask God to give us the Holy Spirit to help us, we will have peace, and David and Rachel are two good examples of this.
Why do Christians need to remember the importance of baptism by immersion when teaching their children or Bible students?
People's circumstances change, and they may see the truth differently.
When her classmates are talking about it, Kimmy doesn't get involved.
What might parents be concerned about if their child is going to be immersed?
18 The head of the family should also imitate Christ in teaching and disciplining his children.
We should therefore take the time to carefully study and reflect deeply on these new understandings. (
If we missionaries are to be more effective in helping the brethren, we need to learn the local language.
Despite this, Joseph did not compromise and acted courageously. (
9 Paul realized that he was limited in what he could do without God's help.
What should we do if we're offended?
If this is how you feel, trust the LORD to help you take courage. (
What can singing accomplish for us in the worship of the Lord?
He noted, "You can find over a hundred examples [of the use of this title] in ancient inscriptions."
We will not be "assimilated into the system" if we see in what ways the mind of God differs from the mind of the world.
16. What can we do to enjoy true freedom?
16 If we want to seek refuge in the LORD, we must have faith in the ransom price of Jesus.
If Bible students or follow-up visitors knew what I chose to entertain, would they think I was practicing what the Bible teaches?"
Jesus told his disciples, "By this my Father will be glorified, that you keep on bearing much fruit, showing yourselves to be my disciples."
Like Jehovah, we hope with all our hearts that others will accept the truth and "live". (
Therefore, it is very important that we cultivate an attitude of Jesus' mind.
Why can we be sure that the LORD understands the need for comfort for the grieving?
(Exodus 33:12-17) Today, if the LORD knows us, we too will receive many blessings.
As we study this text, we also need to think carefully: what can I do to deepen my love for spiritual treasures?
As we continue to cultivate the trait of joy, we will experience more benefits than we can even imagine.
We do this not only to show that we value this precious gift, but also to show that we love Jehovah, the author of the Bible.
12 As we study the Bible, it is easy to see that the LORD accomplishes things that are beyond human imagination.
17 pages Why do we need to "keep on bearing more fruit"?
13. (a) Under what circumstances do we need to show more patience? (
How do we "buy" truth from the Lord?
Each of us can encourage one another (see para. 18)
B) What do we learn from Peter's example and his counsel? (
I felt as if the LORD was saying to me, 'Victoria, let's work out our problems with each other.'
By what means will Jehovah comfort us?
If we know that what we do every day will do our part in God's will, we will be happy.
We see from Scripture that Jehovah has the right to rule, and that His way of ruling is the best.
How can we now embrace the supreme dominion of Jehovah?
How can we follow Joseph's example as we face life's transitions? (See paragraphs 11-13)
How can we do our part to keep God's organization clean?
What do we do to show we have genuine love?
2 This text will talk about what we can do to love and value God's kingdom, evangelism, and biblical truth more.
Why are we comfortable telling the LORD how we feel?
What can we do to honor our brethren who come to speak?
In what ways can we work with the LORD?
Solomon acted with great courage, and with the help of the Lord, he built the magnificent temple in seven and a half years.
How does God's assurance to Abraham indicate a future paradise on earth?
They think this way because they fail to see that freedom of choice is not the same thing as the right to decide what is right and wrong.
Where did this booklet come from?
(See the picture at the beginning of the text.) (b) Why did Jesus react this way?
If Noah's mother and siblings were alive when the flood came, it appears that they did not survive the disaster.
Why can we all be fruitful in our evangelism?
17. (a) What good will it do us to think about how the LORD cares for his people? (
As a result, President Wilson's Fourteen Points for Peace were invoked in the negotiation of the Peace Treaty of Versailles at the end of the Great War, and the "League of Nations" was founded on the basis of those fourteen principles.
To give light and hope.
Parents are to help their children "be wise unto salvation."
3) If we have the right to discipline, how can we imitate the LORD and Jesus?
Second, think carefully about how we can learn from God's example and what good will come from doing so.
We preach patiently to people, and some of them may eventually respond favorably.
We preach to every family in the region so that they have the opportunity to hear the Kingdom message (see para. 14).
B) Why does Paul feel this way?
From the past to the future.
(Psalm 135:4) Hosea foretold that some of the foreigners would be the LORD's people. (
Today, some parents want the best for their children materially no matter what, even if doing so will jeopardize their children's relationship with the LORD.
When someone causes us grief, the first thing we can try to do to improve our relationships is to practice the principles of Colossians 3:12-14.
During His earthly ministry, Jesus taught His disciples some basic truths about the consequences of certain attitudes or behaviors.
Why is there so little mention of Satan in the Biblical record prior to the coming of the Messiah?
15 We cannot allow ourselves to be "assimilated into the system" if we want to see things the same way as Jehovah.
If the manslaughterer had not fled to one of the cities of refuge established by the Lord, the closest relatives of the deceased would have been authorized to put the manslaughterer to death.
If we try to resolve disputes or disagreements with the goal of promoting harmony, we may achieve unexpectedly good results.
How does having a Christlike mindset affect our lives?
Nonetheless, a small greeting can have unexpectedly good results.
Will human suffering ever end?
Why is there such a rule?
Just like a light bulb needs electricity to shine, taking in enough air will make your voice stronger when you speak and sing.
14,15. (a) What should we think about if we want to see things the same way as the LORD? (
Why did things go this way?
3 Blessed are those who do these things
I'm glad I had the honor to do my part in this.
With this unique status.
At that time, the Ku Klux Klan was rampant, advocating racism and often committing acts of violence.
May we therefore make every effort to participate in this important gathering and cherish the solidarity we enjoy in the Paschal Memorial Gathering.
Why is there so little mention of Satan in the Biblical record before the coming of the Messiah?
The LORD wants us to have good friends and set spiritual goals (see paragraphs 9-12).
Page 18 Parents are to help their children to be "wise unto salvation."
Through the Word and Spirit of the LORD and your efforts, you can help your children to be "wise unto salvation".
How does having a spiritual perspective help us (a) avoid activities that jeopardize our spiritual health? (
Blessed are those who do these things.
Although we were Catholics, Grandpa was very open-minded about religion, so he took some religious books and magazines from friends.
Why does judging people based on their financial situation cause problems?
9 Parents disciplining their children lovingly will make them feel secure.
3) How does having a spiritual mind help us in life?
11 You can be sure that by worshipping the LORD you will have many good friends from all over the world, some of whom you have never even met!
Let's also consider that Jesus was only in his early 30's when he completed his earthly mission.
They strive for spiritual goals, put evangelism first in their lives, and are determined not to be influenced by the spirit of the world.
19 As in some of the examples mentioned above, if we do our best and wait in faith for the LORD, we will be able to keep our inner peace. (
In the same way, we are spiritually strengthened when we regularly assimilate the mind of Christ.
These two texts will discuss the benefits of showing generosity in different ways.
You may be thinking, "What's the benefit of greeting someone?
The Bible tells us that people are truly happy when they have a good relationship with the LORD.
One of the ways we show love and generosity is to help our brothers and sisters in need (see paragraph 12).
16 Jesus set a good example for us in terms of a reasonable view of recreation.
In one case, Sister Renee spent 80 hours witnessing to people while she was in the hospital for two and a half weeks.
However, we need to know who these two magazines are for in order to more effectively target them to the right people.
People's circumstances change, they may see the truth differently.
What blessings will God bestow on his friends?
But to be loved and blessed by the LORD, we must worship Him in a way that is pleasing to Him and have a good relationship with God.
If this is how you feel, trust the LORD to help you take courage. (
All suffering must end, and there is hope for life. ( Psalm 37:9-11 )
Please think about the fact that we eat nutritious food to keep our bodies healthy and strong.
I am responsible for obtaining visas and arranging transportation for the graduates so that these dedicated brothers and sisters can get to their area of assignment.
14 What should true Christians do to be seen as different from the followers of false religions?
What can we do to avoid becoming an exclusive lover of ourselves?
We study the Bible to find out valuable truths that will make us spiritual beings.
14 Romans 12:2 exhorts us, "Do not be assimilated to this system, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may test the good and perfect will of God, which is pleasing to him."
The second text will remind us how to avoid wrong attitudes so as not to lose the reward promised by the LORD.
What can we do so that we don't forget to offer our possessions to the LORD?
One of these is to avoid situations that would tempt us to violate God's law.
8 Today, if a Christian commits a serious sin, he needs to seek help from the elders of the congregation to restore a good relationship with God.
Will I help my child to see things from the LORD's point of view and not be influenced by the world's view?"
The first text will discuss the challenges we face in finding out the truth about what is going on, and will look at biblical principles that can help us to more accurately discern the truth of a message.
What are we going to do to make the LORD know us?
He will make you strong.
Will I discipline my children and myself to stay away from too many entertainment programs or information?
People in Jesus' lineage records were not always the firstborn.
He gave his precious son for all mankind.
8. (a) What do some people think today about disobedient parents? (
Parents are to help their children "be wise unto salvation."
As a Christian, you will teach your children to obey the Bible's command, "Honor your father and mother." (
About 4,000 years later, Jehovah paid a great price for the salvation of mankind by sacrificing his only son. (
There is no doubt that God will bless parents who help their children.
If the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed. --John 8:36
Children are not born knowing what is right and what is wrong; they need to be trained (see para. 8).
Soon, I was also discussing the Bible with my brother's daughter and son-in-law.
Thou hast given the throne to Christ.
Have parents helped their children avoid harmful entertainment? (
10 Let's look at another example of someone who needed to be encouraged, the daughter of Shlomo Jephthah.
Why do parents need to keep teaching their children? (see paras. 14-18)
Today, some parents want the best for their children materially no matter what, even if doing so will jeopardize their children's relationship with the LORD.
Why is it so sad and desperate to have unfulfilled wishes for children?
18 Before giving his life, Jesus told his disciples that the Son of Man "will be in the earth three days and three nights".
What are some things Christian parents should be sure of before their children are baptized?
8 Thomas knew that teaching his daughter required patience.
In this case, will you show courage and tactfully explain why?
Other times, I'll tell my son that I need a few days to think about what he's saying, too.
For example, some teens may be attracted to the things of this world, and they may begin to wonder if living by biblical principles is really the best thing to do? (
He said that in the last days, children would disobey their parents.
Those Christian parents will likely ask you the reason you don't let your children participate.
Although we don't fully understand how you feel, the LORD knows exactly how sad your heart is and will always be there to support you.
I preached with my mother and brother Grigore in a village near Tulum, but we had to be careful and alert.
We're really glad we could entertain them!"
"We want you to know that we love you very much.
After that, we drove on to Amsterdam, where we caught a flight back to New York.
Since then, we haven't had any problems getting along."
We soon accepted the truth. Soon there was a small congregation in Hemsworth.
When we came back to the square again, some people passing by asked us: 'Are you okay?
Later, we were commissioned to preach in an area near the Brazilian border.
John the Baptist sent his disciples to ask Jesus, "Are you 'the one who is to come'?
But we're not afraid.
We got up before dawn (as we did in Joplin, Missouri) and quietly slipped flyers or pamphlets under the doors of the tenants.
We preached door-to-door in the morning and then went out to teach people the Bible, sometimes until 11:00 p.m. We had a lot of time to do that.
So, we both started on November 1, 1947 as pioneers.
When Gillis looked back on those days, he said, "I told Mathias from time to time that my mom and I loved him very much and often prayed fervently to God for the LORD to help our son understand the truth."
We are both so happy to be attending Kile School together!
How honored we are.
Later, Brother Atkinson invited us to a meeting at a brother's home a few kilometers away.
Please help us to be more determined.
"I work with a brother, but I don't get along with him.
17 Sergio said: "There was a time when we did not go to the square to preach because we were sick.
Then Arthur, who was with me for 66 years, passed away on 5/20/2015.
The first week after our wedding, we began visiting the congregation on the island of Lapu-Lapu.
There, we had to cross mountains and travel long distances, but we were both happy to be able to assist our brothers and sisters in the remote areas.
Brother Hughes said, "We need some couples to get involved in special evangelistic campaigns, driving around the country distributing tracts."
Why did the Apostle Paul exhort Christians of Hebrew descent to make a greater effort to encourage one another?
8 The supreme dominion of the LORD is important, but that does not mean that we are worthless in God's eyes or that he does not value the arrangements for our salvation.
Therefore, we should not let imperfections stop us from singing and praising the LORD.
People in Jesus' lineage records were not always the firstborn.
15,16. (a) Does a person need to be of a certain age to be baptized? Please explain. (
If mankind does not obey God, it will have to decide for itself what is right and what is wrong.
Some brothers feel that they are not able to fulfill the work of the congregation.
However, not everyone responds favorably when they hear the message of the Kingdom. (
However, if you give up serving the LORD because you are discouraged, you will soon realize that the people of this world do not care about you as much as your Christian parents and your brothers and sisters in the congregation do.
So, you may be thinking, "How can I become spiritual and receive much benefit?"
In this case, will you show courage and tactfully explain why?
7 Those defenceless Israeli soldiers may wonder, "How are we going to protect our families if the enemy raids the camp?"
But do you see the resurrection as an important truth and share it with others?
The following biblical examples will give us an idea of how greetings can do more than just make people feel welcome.
Like a fire burning inside.
The first text will explain what we should do if we think the world's viewpoint sounds reasonable and appealing.
If Bible students or follow-up visitors knew what I chose to entertain, would they think I was practicing what the Bible teaches?"
If God can fill the sun with great energy, can't he give us enough strength to cope with our problems?
Or think visibility can be used to promote good news?
Have you read the last few issues of The Watchtower carefully?
B) What's a good experience you've had recently distributing this magazine?
Peter read it, tears welling up in his eyes, and he asked Dunn, "Am I one of the sheep?"
Will I discipline my children and myself to stay away from entertainment programs and information?
At that time, Moses said to the Israelites, "Must we bring you water from this rock?"
12,13.(a) What helps us to apply Romans 15:5? (
Is that what you want too?
Do you have the courage to recognize Jesus as your King?
When we came back to the square again, some people passing by asked us: 'Are you okay?
Does she really understand that baptism is a serious decision?
Do you honor the younger brothers? (see paragraph 15)
16 pages Do you try to resolve disputes and promote harmony?
3 Will you wait patiently?
What is more important than your relationship with the LORD?
Are you helping your family and brothers and sisters to stay close to the LORD's organization? (
Page 8 Do you seek refuge in the LORD?
Do you judge a book by its cover?
How can the principles of Scripture help me decide if I want to play online with strangers?"
10 We can ask ourselves, "Does my lifestyle show that I really know the Lord?
The first question is: "Have you repented of your sins and offered yourself to the LORD to do His will, according to the sacrifice of Jesus Christ?"
Would you see the elders' help as a sign that the LORD loves you?
Did they return to Jerusalem just to live in comfort?
Am I really willing to forgive someone who has offended me?"
Children are not born knowing what is right and what is wrong; they need to be trained (see para. 8).
We should ask ourselves, "Have I followed the example of the loving Samaritan?
32 pages. Do you remember?
Do you have all your spiritual armor?
Have parents helped their children avoid harmful entertainment? (
Do you have good communication with the LORD? (See paragraphs 8-11)
Do you live in a way that shows you are a Jehovah's Witness? (
Do you try to resolve disputes and promote harmony?
Some people go to pre-evangelistic meetings even though they are tired, and they feel restored after the preaching, have you experienced this too?
Do you have a guardian angel?
Will you wait patiently?
Do you know the truth of the matter?
Do you need to tell them everything?
Are you facing problems, such as illness, financial difficulties or persecution?
David said, "Let him curse."
Am I patient with my brothers and sisters and understand their situation?
17 Young people, think about this: if your parents never correct you, do you think they really care about you? (
I said, "Yeah, I guess."
Generally speaking, people respond well to acts of generosity.
8 Are you helping your child progress to baptism?
The Bible says, "And Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel."
Don't you know that everyone here goes to your hometown to get a job!"
15. How do the verses in Psalm 37:25 and Hebrews 13:5 help parents show courage?
B) Is there no limit to this freedom?
Or will you be too young and inexperienced to take on this responsibility?
Or is he just a different personality than me?"
Page 25 Young man, are you committed to your spiritual goals?
What great reward did the LORD give to Louis and Pelletier for their patience?
For this flyer, you can show the person the question on the cover of the flyer and ask them: "Have you ever thought about what the future holds?
Can a Christian who is already joyful feel more joyful?
32 pages. Did you know that?
Will human suffering ever end?
If we love the LORD as well as our brothers and sisters, we will endeavor not to allow personality differences to disrupt the peace of God's people.
But do you see the resurrection as an important truth and share it with others?
Do you imitate the LORD in your dealings with others? (
One day, Peter asked Dunn, "Why do you bother me so much?
Am I motivated by faith not only to live according to God's standard of justice, but also to proclaim God's standard to others?"
Am I endeavoring to see them in the light of the LORD?"
9 Jesus makes it clear that we should treat each other as brothers and sisters, and then he emphasizes the importance of humility. (
Do all the people in the Messianic lineage records have primogeniture?
Even if it's not a big house, can you provide lodging?
If we worship the Lord, we must want to be loved by him, don't we?
Have there been any significant advances in the medical and scientific communities in this area since the 1979 article in The Watchtower was published?
Are you helping your child progress to baptism?
Do you treasure your ministry and try to set aside time each week to preach? (
Should I do this job?"
Can a Christian make a decision and then change it?
17 Are you willing to receive more training in order to do a better job in serving God?
B) What good experiences have you had playing these movies lately?
Paul and Barnabas immediately made it clear that they did not agree with the crowd by tearing off their coats and jumping into the crowd, shouting, "Why are you doing this?
13 pages. Do you remember?
Will I help my child to see things from the LORD's point of view and not be influenced by the world's view?"
3 Do you know the truth of the matter?
Do you seek refuge in the LORD?
So, would Federico encourage other brothers and sisters to preach in areas of greater need?
Abraham said to his wife, "Please tell people that you are my sister."
After Adam and Eve sinned, they "wove dresses of fig leaves to cover their bodies".
Do you see things from Jehovah's point of view?
Will the decisions I make help me pursue my spiritual goals? (
Will the decisions I make help me advance spiritually? (
23 Do you see things from the LORD's point of view?
In Matthew 10:11-13, Jesus said, "When you enter a house, greet the people in it.
Are you striving to reach a spiritual goal?
14 pages Do you judge people by their appearance?
Young man, are you committed to your spiritual goals?
After attending a few meetings, the brothers asked me and the others, "Do you want to be baptized?"
10 Are we in agreement with Jehovah and Jesus?
The couple gave him two booklets, "The Origin of Life - Five Questions to Ponder" and "Does Life Come from Creation?". .
12 Would it be too harsh for the LORD to counsel Job directly after he had endured a severe trial?
(a) What was the spirit of Isaiah? (b) How can Christians today imitate Isaiah?
Do you remember how the Assyrian Praetorian Chief terrorized God's people?
If Bible students or follow-up visitors knew what I chose to entertain, would they think I was practicing what the Bible teaches?"
Will the decisions I make help me get along with people? (
15 Young man, do you want to fit in with your friends?